
"Rosenthal, Amy" 
<amy.rosenthal@urs.com> 

04/12/2012 10:12 AM

To ArcticAR <arcticar@urscorp.com>

cc

bcc

Subject FW: Final Comment Analysis Report for NMFS Arctic EIS

 
 
From: Candace Nachman [mailto:candace.nachman@noaa.gov] 
Sent: Thursday, April 12, 2012 7:18 AM
To: Loman, Jeffery; Lage, Jana L; Sloan, Pete; Banet, Susan; Cranswick, Deborah; Warren, Sharon E; 
jill.lewandowski@boem.gov; Skrupky, Kimberly A; James.Bennett2@boem.gov; Fesmire, Mark E; Walker, 
Jeffrey; Kyle.Monkelien@bsee.gov; emma.pokon@north-slope.org; Robert Suydam; 
tomlohman2@aol.com; Jennifer Curtis; Shaw.Hanh@epa.gov; Soderlund.Dianne@epamail.epa.gov; 
Shane Guan; Mark Hodor; Jennifer Nist; Steve Leathery; Brad Smith; Blackburn, Scott G; Butterworth, 
Megan
Cc: Jolie Harrison; Michael Payne; Rosenthal, Amy; Isaacs, Jon; Kluwe, Joan; Fuchs, Kim
Subject: Final Comment Analysis Report for NMFS Arctic EIS
 
Attached is the Final Comment Analysis Report for the Draft EIS.  URS went through and coded 
all of the letters and oral comments made during the public comment period.  We have boiled it 
down to 463 different statements of concern (SOCs) requiring responses and possible changes to 
the document.

I have also attached a matrix for you all to use as you work on the responses to comments.  
Please use the attached matrix.  This will make it easier for myself and URS to go through your 
suggestions when it is time to update the document.  In the first column, please enter the 3 letter 
code for the issue category.  In the second column, enter the number associated with that SOC 
for that category.  Column 3 is where you enter your proposed response.  In column 4, indicate 
with a Y or N if a change is needed to text of the EIS based on this response.  If you enter Y in 
column 4, in column 5, please note the section where the change should be made and your 
suggested textual edit.  However, if you prefer, in column 5, you can just put the section number 
where you made the change and then make the change directly in the EIS document itself.

The schedule that I sent out the other week indicates that this step needs to be completed by 
Friday, May 18.  Therefore, please email me your completed matrices (and other necessary 
documents) by COB (for your time zone) on Friday, May 18.

I am certain that we will need to hold interagency calls to discuss and resolve many of the 
comments.  However, I want to first give everyone the opportunity to read through the comment 
analysis report before scheduling such a call or calls.

As always, please feel free to contact me with questions or concerns.

Thanks,
Candace



-- 
Candace Nachman
Fishery Biologist

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
National Marine Fisheries Service
Office of Protected Resources
Permits and Conservation Division
1315 East West Highway, Rm 3503
Silver Spring, MD 20910

Ph: (301) 427-8429
Fax: (301) 713-0376

Web: http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/ 

This e-mail and any attachments contain URS Corporation confidential information that may be proprietary or privileged. If you 
receive this message in error or are not the intended recipient, you should not retain, distribute, disclose or use any of this 
information and you should destroy the e-mail and any attachments or copies.



Effects of Oil and Gas 
Activities in the Arctic Ocean 

Final Comment Analysis Report 
  

 

 

United States Department of Commerce 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
Office of Protected Resources 

April 10, 2012 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS i 
Comment Analysis Report 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLE OF CONTENTS ............................................................................................................................ i 

LIST OF TABLES ....................................................................................................................................... i 

LIST OF FIGURES ..................................................................................................................................... i 

LIST OF APPENDICES ............................................................................................................................. i 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................... ii 

 

1.0 INTRODUCTION.......................................................................................................................... 1 

2.0 BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................................ 1 

3.0 THE ROLE OF PUBLIC COMMENT ....................................................................................... 1 

4.0 ANALYSIS OF PUBLIC SUBMISSIONS .................................................................................. 3 

5.0 STATEMENTS OF CONCERN .................................................................................................. 7 

 

APPENDIX 

 

 

 

LIST OF TABLES 

Table 1 Public Meetings, Locations and Dates ....................................................................... Page 2 

Table 2 Issue Categories for DEIS Comments ....................................................................... Page 4 

 

LIST OF FIGURES 

Figure 1 Comments by Issue .................................................................................................... Page 6 

 

LIST OF APPENDICES 

Appendix A Submission and Comment Index 

 

  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS ii 
Comment Analysis Report 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

AEWC Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission 

APA Administrative Procedure Act 

BOEM Bureau of Ocean Energy Management 

CAA Conflict Avoidance Agreement 

CAR Comment Analysis Report 

CASy Comment Analysis System database  

DEIS Draft Environmental Impact Statement 

ESA Endangered Species Act 

IEA Important Ecological Area 

IHA Incidental Harassment Authorization 

ITAs Incidental Take Authorizations  

ITRs Incidental Take Regulations 

MMPA Marine Mammal Protection Act 

NEPA National Environmental Policy Act 

NMFS National Marine Fisheries Service 

OCS Outer Continental Shelf 

OCSLA Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act 

PAM Passive Acoustic Monitoring 

SOC Statement of Concern 

TK Traditional Knowledge 

USC United States Code 

USGS U.S. Geological Survey 

VLOS Very Large Oil Spill 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 1 
Comment Analysis Report 

1.0 INTRODUCTION 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) and 
the U.S. Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) have prepared and 
released a Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) that analyzes the effects of offshore geophysical 
seismic surveys and exploratory drilling in the federal and state waters of the U.S. Beaufort and Chukchi 
seas. 

The proposed actions considered in the DEIS are: 

• NMFS’ issuance of incidental take authorizations (ITAs) under Section 101(a)(5) of the Marine 
Mammal Protection Act (MMPA), for the taking of marine mammals incidental to conducting 
seismic surveys, ancillary activities, and exploratory drilling; and 

• BOEM’s issuance of permits and authorizations under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act for 
seismic surveys and ancillary activities. 

2.0 BACKGROUND 
NMFS is serving as the lead agency for this EIS.  BOEM (formerly called the U.S. Minerals Management 
Service) and the North Slope Borough are cooperating agencies on this EIS.  The U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency is serving as a consulting agency.  NMFS is also coordinating with the Alaska Eskimo 
Whaling Commission pursuant to our co-management agreement under the MMPA. 

The Notice of Intent to prepare an EIS was published in the Federal Register on February 8, 2010 (75 FR 
6175).  On December 30, 2011, Notice of Availability was published in the Federal Register (76 FR 
82275) that NMFS had released for public comment the ‘‘Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the 
Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean.” The original deadline to submit comments was 
February 13, 2012.  Based on several written requests received by NMFS, the public comment period for 
this DEIS was extended by 15 days.  Notice of extension of the comment period and notice of public 
meetings was published January 18, 2012, in the Federal Register (77 FR 2513).  The comment period 
concluded on February 28, 2012, making the entire comment period 60 days. 

NMFS intends to use this EIS to:  1) evaluate the potential effects of different levels of offshore seismic 
surveys and exploratory drilling activities occurring in the Beaufort and Chukchi seas; 2) take a 
comprehensive look at potential cumulative impacts in the EIS project area; and 3) evaluate the 
effectiveness of various mitigation measures.  NMFS will use the findings of the EIS when reviewing 
individual applications for ITAs associated with seismic surveys, ancillary activities, and exploratory 
drilling in the Beaufort and Chukchi seas. 

3.0 THE ROLE OF PUBLIC COMMENT 
During the public comment period, public meetings were held to inform and to solicit comments from the 
public on the DEIS.  The meetings consisted of an open house, a brief presentation, and then a public 
comment opportunity.  Transcripts of each public meeting are available on the project website 
(http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/permits/eis/arctic.htm).  Meetings were cancelled in the communities of 
Nuiqsut, Kaktovik, and Point Lay due to extreme weather conditions.  The six public meetings that were 
held are described in Table 1. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 2 
Comment Analysis Report 

Table 1.  Public Meetings, Locations and Dates 

Meeting Date Location 

Wainwright January 30, 2012 Wainwright Community Center,  
Wainwright, AK 

Barrow January 31, 2012 Iñupiat Heritage Center,  
Barrow, AK 

Kivalina February 6, 2012 McQueen School, 
Kivalina 

Kotzebue February 7, 2012 Northwest Arctic Borough Assembly Chambers,  
Kotzebue, AK 

Point Hope February 8, 2012 Point Hope Community Center,  
Point Hope, AK 

Anchorage February 13, 2012 
 

Loussac Library – Wilda Marston Theatre  
Anchorage, Anchorage, AK 

 

These meetings were attended by a variety of stakeholders, including Federal agencies, Tribal 
governments, state agencies, local governments, Alaska Native organizations, businesses, special interest 
groups/non-governmental organizations, and individuals. 

In a separate, but parallel process for government to government consultation, Tribal governments in each 
community, with the exception of Anchorage, were notified of the availability of the DEIS and invited to 
give comments.  The first contact was via letter that was faxed, dated December 22, 2011; follow-up calls 
and emails were made with the potentially affected Tribal governments, and in the communities listed 
above, each government was visited during the comment period.  Because NMFS was not able to make it 
to the communities of Nuiqsut, Kaktovik, and Point Lay on the originally scheduled dates, a follow-up 
letter was sent on February 29, 2012, requesting a teleconference meeting for government to government 
consultation.  Nuiqsut and Point Lay rescheduled with teleconferences.  However, the Native Village of 
Nuiqsut did not call-in to the rescheduled teleconference.  The comments received during government to 
government consultation between NMFS, BOEM, and the Tribal governments are included in a separate 
Comment Analysis Report (CAR).   

NMFS and the cooperating agencies will review all comments, determine how the comments should be 
addressed, and make appropriate revisions in preparing the Final EIS.  The Final EIS will contain the 
comments submitted and a summary of comment responses. 

The Final EIS will include public notice of document availability, the distribution of the document, and a 
30-day comment/waiting period on the final document.  NMFS and BOEM are expected to each issue a 
separate Record of Decision (ROD), which will then conclude the EIS process in early 2013.  The 
selected alternative will be identified in each ROD, as well as the agency’s rationale for their conclusions 
regarding the environmental effects and appropriate mitigation measures for the proposed project. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 3 
Comment Analysis Report 

4.0 ANALYSIS OF PUBLIC SUBMISSIONS 
The body of this report provides a brief summary of the comment analysis process and the comments that 
were received during the public comment period.  Two appendices follow this narrative, including the 
Submission and Comment Index and the Government to Government CAR. 

Comments were received on the DEIS in several ways: 

• Oral discussion or testimony from the public meeting transcripts; 

• Written comments received by mail or fax; and 

• Written comments submitted electronically by email or through the project website. 

NMFS received a total of 67 unique submissions on the DEIS.  There were 49,436 form letters received 
and reviewed.  One submission as a form letter from the Natural Resources Defense Council contained 
36,445 signatures, and another submission as a form letter from the Sierra Club contained 12,991 
signatures.  Group affiliations of those that submitted comments include: Federal agencies, Tribal 
governments, state agencies, local governments, Alaska Native organizations, businesses, special interest 
groups/non-governmental organizations, and individuals.  The complete text of public comments received 
will be included in the Administrative Record for the EIS. 

This CAR provides an analytical summary of these submissions.  It presents the methodology used by 
NMFS in reviewing, sorting, and synthesizing substantive comments within each submission into 
common themes.  As described in the following sections of this report, a careful and deliberate approach 
has been undertaken to ensure that all substantive public comments were captured. 

The coding phase was used to divide each submission into a series of substantive comments (herein 
referred to as ‘comments’).  All submissions on the DEIS were read, reviewed, and logged into the 
Comment Analysis System database (CASy) where they were assigned an automatic tracking number 
(Submission ID).  These comments were recorded into the CASy and given a unique Comment ID 
number (with reference to the Submission ID) for tracking and synthesis.  The goal of this process was to 
ensure that each sentence and paragraph in a submission containing a substantive comment pertinent to 
the DEIS was entered into the CASy.  Substantive content constituted assertions, suggested actions, data, 
background information, or clarifications relating to the content of the DEIS. 

Comments were assigned subject issue categories to describe the content of the comment (see Table 2).  
The issues were grouped by general topics, including effects, available information, regulatory 
compliance, and Iñupiat culture.  The relative distribution of comments by issue is shown in Figure 1. 

A total of 25 issue categories were developed for coding during the first step of the analysis process as 
shown in Table 2.  These categories evolved from common themes found throughout the submissions.  
Some categories correspond directly to sections of the DEIS, while others focus on more procedural 
topics.  Several submissions included attachments of scientific studies or reports or requested specific 
edits to the DEIS text. 

The public comment submissions generated 1,874 substantive comments, which were then grouped into 
Statements of Concern (SOCs).  SOCs are summary statements intended to capture the different themes 
identified in the substantive comments.  SOCs are frequently supported by additional text to further 
explain the concern, or alternatively to capture the specific comment variations within that grouping.  
SOCs are not intended to replace actual comments.  Rather, they summarize for the reader the range of 
comments on a specific topic. 

Every substantive comment was assigned to an SOC; a total of 463 SOCs were developed.  Each SOC is 
represented by an issue category code followed by a number.  NMFS will use the SOCs to respond to 
substantive comments on the DEIS, as appropriate.  Each issue category may have more than one SOC.  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 4 
Comment Analysis Report 

For example, there are 12 SOCs under the issue category “Cumulative Effects” (CEF 1, CEF 2, CEF 3, 
etc.).  Each comment was assigned to one SOC.  The complete list of SOCs can be found in Section 5.0. 

Table 2.  Issue Categories for DEIS Comments 

GROUP Issue Category Code Summary 

Effects Cumulative Effects CEF Comments related to cumulative impacts in 
general, or for a specific resource 

Physical Environment 
(General) 

GPE Comments related to impacts on resources within 
the physical environment (Physical 
Oceanography, Climate, Acoustics, and 
Environmental Contaminants & Ecosystem 
Functions) 

Social Environment 
(General) 

GSE Comments related to impacts on resources within 
the social environment (Public Health, Cultural, 
Land Ownership/Use/Management, 
Transportation, Recreation and Tourism, Visual 
Resources, and Environmental Justice) 

Habitat  HAB Comments associated with habitat requirements, 
or potential habitat impacts from seismic 
activities and exploratory drilling. Comment 
focus is habitat, not animals. 

Marine Mammal and other 
Wildlife Impacts 

MMI General comments related to potential impacts to 
marine mammals or other wildlife, unrelated to 
subsistence resource concepts. 

National Energy Demand and 
Supply 

NED Comments related to meeting national energy 
demands, supply of energy. 

Oil Spill Risks OSR Concerns about potential for oil spill, ability to 
clean up spills in various conditions, potential 
impacts to resources or environment from spills. 

Socioeconomic Impacts SEI Comments on economic impacts to local 
communities, regional economy, and national 
economy, can include changes in the social or 
economic environments. 

Subsistence Resource 
Protection 

SRP Comments on need to protect subsistence 
resources and potential impacts to these 
resources. Can include ocean resources as our 
garden, contamination. 

Water and Air Quality WAQ Comments regarding water and air quality, 
including potential to impact or degrade these 
resources. 

Info 
Available 

Data DATA Comments referencing scientific studies that 
should be considered. 

Research, Monitoring, 
Evaluation Needs 

RME Comments on baseline research, monitoring, and 
evaluation needs  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 5 
Comment Analysis Report 

GROUP Issue Category Code Summary 

Process: 
NEPA, 
Permits, the 
DEIS 

Alternatives ALT Comments related to alternatives or alternative 
development. 

Coordination and 
Compatibility 

COR Comments on compliance with statues, laws or 
regulations and Executive Orders that should be 
considered; coordinating with federal, state, or 
local agencies, organizations, or potential 
applicants; permitting requirements. 

Discharge DCH Comments regarding discharge levels, including 
requests for zero discharge requirements, and 
deep waste injection wells; does not include 
contamination of subsistence resources. 

Mitigation Measures MIT Comments related to suggestions for or 
implementation of mitigation measures. 

NEPA NEP Comments on aspects of the NEPA process 
(purpose and need, scoping, public involvement, 
etc.), issues with the impact criteria (Chapter 4), 
or issues with the impact analysis. 

Peer Review PER Suggestions for peer review of permits, activities, 
proposals. 

Regulatory Compliance REG Comments associated with compliance with 
existing regulations, laws, and statutes. 

General Editorial EDI Comments associated with specific text edits to 
the document. 

Comment Acknowledged ACK Entire submission determined not to be 
substantive and warranted only a “comment 
acknowledged” response. 

Iñupiat 
Culture 

Iñupiat Culture and Way of 
Life 

ICL Comments related to potential cultural impacts or 
desire to maintain traditional practices 
(PEOPLE). 

Use of Traditional 
Knowledge 

UTK Comments regarding how traditional knowledge 
(TK) is used in the document or decision making 
process, need to incorporate TK, or processes for 
documenting TK. 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 6 
Comment Analysis Report 

Figure 1:  Comments by Issue 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 7 
Comment Analysis Report 

5.0 STATEMENTS OF CONCERN 
This section presents the SOCs developed to help summarize comments received on the DEIS.  To assist 
in finding which SOCs were contained in each submission, a Submission and Comment Index 
(Appendix A) was created.  The index is a list of all submissions received, presented alphabetically by the 
last name of the commenter, as well as the Submission ID associated with the submission, and which 
SOCs responds to their specific comments.  To identify the specific issues that are contained in an 
individual submission: 1) search for the submission of interest in Appendix A; 2) note which SOC codes 
are listed under the submissions; 3) locate the SOC within Section 5.0; and 4) read the text next to that 
SOC.  Each substantive comment contained in a submission was assigned to one SOC. 

 

 

  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 8 
Comment Analysis Report 

Comment Acknowledged (ACK) 
ACK Entire submission determined not to be substantive and warranted only a “comment 

acknowledged” response. 

ACK 1 Comment Acknowledged. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 9 
Comment Analysis Report 

Alternatives (ALT) 
ALT Comments related to alternatives or alternative development. 

ALT 1 NMFS should adopt the No Action Alternative (Alternative 1) as the preferred alternative, 
which represents a precautionary, ecosystem-based approach. There is a considerable amount 
of public support for this alternative. It is the only reliable way to prevent a potential 
catastrophic oil spill from occurring in the Arctic Ocean, and provides the greatest protections 
from negative impacts to marine mammals from noise and vessel strikes. Alternative 1 is the 
only alternative that makes sense given the state of missing scientific baseline, as well as 
long-term, data on impacts to marine mammals and subsistence activities resulting from oil 
and gas exploration. 

ALT 2 NMFS should edit the No Action Alternative to describe the present agency decision-making 
procedures. The No Action Alternative should be rewritten to include NMFS’ issuance of 
IHAs and preparing project-specific EAs for exploration activities as they do currently. If 
NMFS wishes to consider an alternative in which they stop issuing authorizations, it should 
be considered as an additional alternative, no the No Action alternative. 

ALT 3 Limiting the extent of activity to two exploration programs annually in the Beaufort and 
Chukchi seas is unreasonable and will shut out leaseholders. The restrictions and mitigation 
measures outlined in the five alternatives of the DEIS would likely make future development 
improbable and uneconomic. Because the DEIS does not present any alternative that would 
cover the anticipated level of industry activity, it would cap industry activity in a way that (a) 
positions the DEIS as a decisional document in violation of NEPA standards, and (b) would 
constitute an economic taking. NMFS should revise the levels of activity within the action 
alternatives to address these concerns. 

ALT 4 The “range” of action alternatives only considers two levels of activity. The narrow range of 
alternatives presented in the DEIS and the lack of specificity regarding the source levels, 
timing, duration, and location of the activities being considered do not provide a sufficient 
basis for determining whether other options might exist for oil and gas development with 
significantly less environmental impact, including reduced effects on marine mammals. 
NMFS and BOEM should expand the range of alternatives to ensure that oil and gas 
exploration activities have no more than a negligible impact on marine mammal species and 
stocks, and will not have adverse impacts on the Alaska Native communities that depend on 
the availability of marine mammals for subsistence, as required under the Marine Mammal 
Protection Act. 

ALT 5 The range of alternatives presented in the DEIS do not assist decision-makers in determining 
what measures can be taken to reduce impacts and what choices may be preferential from an 
environmental standpoint. There is no indication in the analysis as to which alternative would 
be cause for greater concern, from either an activity level or location standpoint. NMFS needs 
to revise the alternatives and their assessment of effects to reflect these concerns. 

ALT 6 An EIS must evaluate a reasonable range of alternatives in order to fully comply with NEPA. 
The DEIS does not provide a reasonable range of alternatives. The No Action Alternative is 
inaccurately stated (does not reflect current conditions), and Alternative 5 is infeasible 
because those technologies are not available. Multiple alternatives with indistinguishable 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 10 
Comment Analysis Report 

outcomes do not represent a “range” and do not assist in determining preferential options. 
NMFS needs to revise the EIS to present a reasonable range of alternatives for analysis. 

ALT 7 NMFS should consider additional alternatives (or components of alternatives) including: 

• A phased, adaptive approach for increasing oil and gas activities 
• Avoidance of redundant seismic surveys 
• Development of a soundscape approach and consideration of caps on noise or activity 

levels for managing sound sources during the open water period, and 
• A clear basis for judging whether the impacts of industry activities are negligible as 

required by the Marine Mammal Protection Act. 

ALT 8 The levels of oil and gas exploration activity identified in Alternatives 2 and 3 are not 
accurate. In particular, the DEIS significantly over estimates the amount of seismic 
exploration that is reasonably foreseeable in the next five years, while underestimating the 
amount of exploration drilling that could occur. The alternatives are legally flawed because 
none of the alternatives address scenarios that are currently being contemplated and which are 
most likely to occur. For example: 

• Level 1 activity assumes as many as three site clearance and shallow hazard survey 
programs in the Chukchi Sea, while Level 2 activity assumes as many as 5 such 
programs. By comparison, the ITR petition recently submitted by AOGA to USFWS for 
polar bear and walrus projects as many as seven (and as few as zero) shallow hazard 
surveys and as many as two (and as few as one) other G&G surveys annually in the 
Chukchi Sea over the next five years. 

• The assumption for the number of source vessels and concurrent activity is unlikely. 
• By 2014, ConocoPhillips intends to conduct exploration drilling in the Chukchi Sea. It is 

also probable that Statoil will be conducting exploration drilling on their prospects in the 
Chukchi Sea beginning in 2014. Accordingly, in 2014, and perhaps later years depending 
upon results, there may be as many as three exploration drilling programs occurring in 
the Chukchi Sea. 

The alternatives scenarios should be adjusted by NMFS to account for realistic levels of 
seismic and exploratory drilling activities, and the subsequent impact analyses should be 
substantially revised. The DEIS does not explain why alternatives that would more accurately 
represent likely levels of activity were omitted from inclusion in the DEIS as required under 
40 C.F.R. Sections 1500.1 and Section 1502.14. 

ALT 9 NMFS should include, as part of the assumptions associated with the alternatives, an analysis 
examining how many different lessees there are, where their respective leases are in each 
planning area (Beaufort vs. Chukchi seas), when their leases expire, and when they anticipate 
exploring (by activity) their leases for hydrocarbons. This will help frame the levels of 
activity that are considered in the EIS. 

ALT 10 There is a 2016 lease sale in Chukchi Sea and a 2015 lease sale in Beaufort Sea within the 
Proposed 5 Year Plan. Alternatives should include some seismic, shallow hazard and possibly 
drilling to account for these lease sales. 

ALT 11 In every impact category but one, the draft impact findings for Alternative 4 are identical to 
the draft impact findings for Alternative 3 (Level 2 activity with standard mitigation 
measures). Given that the impacts with and without additional mitigation are the same, 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 11 
Comment Analysis Report 

Alternative 4 neither advances thoughtful decision-making nor provides a rational 
justification under the MMPA for NMFS to impose any additional conditions beyond 
standard mitigation measures. Alternative 4 provides no useful analysis because the context is 
entirely abstract (i.e., independent from a specific proposal). The need and effectiveness of 
any given mitigation measure, standard or otherwise, can only be assessed in the context of a 
specific activity proposed for a given location and time, under then-existing circumstances. 
Finally, the identified time/area closures, and the use of a 120 dB and 160 dB buffer zones, 
have no sound scientific or other factual basis. Alternative 4 should be changed to allow for 
specific mitigations and time constraints designed to match proposed projects as they occur. 

ALT 12 Camden Bay, Barrow Canyon, Hanna Shoal, and Kasegaluk Lagoon are not currently listed 
as critical habitat and do not maintain special protective status. NMFS should remove 
Alternative 4 from further consideration until such time that these areas are officially 
designated by law to warrant special protective measures. In addition, these temporal/spatial 
limitations should be removed from Section 2.4.10(b). 

ALT 13 Alternative 5 should be deleted. The alternative is identical to Alternative 3 with the 
exception that it includes "alternative technologies" as possible mitigation measures. 
However, virtually none of the technologies discussed are currently commercially available 
nor will they be during the time frame of this EIS, which makes the analysis useless for 
NEPA purposes. Because the majority of these technologies have not yet been built and/or 
tested, it is difficult to fully analyze the level of impacts from these devices. Therefore, 
additional NEPA analyses (i.e., tiering) will likely be required if applications are received 
requesting to use these technologies during seismic surveys. 

ALT 14 The alternative technologies identified in Alternative 5 should not be viewed as a replacement 
for airgun-based seismic surveys in all cases. 

ALT 15 The DEIS fails to include any actionable alternatives to require, incentivize, or test the use of 
new technologies in the Arctic. Such alternatives include: 

• Mandating the use of marine vibroseis or other technologies in pilot areas, with an 
obligation to accrue data on environmental impacts; 

• Creating an adaptive process by which marine vibroseis or other technologies can be 
required as they become available; 

• Deferring the permitting of surveys in particular areas or for particular applications where 
effective mitigative technologies, such as marine vibroseis, could reasonably be expected 
to become available within the life of the EIS; 

• Providing incentives for use of these technologies as was done for passive acoustic 
monitoring systems in NTL 2007-G02; and 

• Exacting funds from applicants to support accelerated mitigation research in this area. 

NMFS must include these alternatives in the Final EIS analysis. 

ALT 16 The reasons to NOT evaluate specific program numbers in the 2007 DPEIS would apply to 
the current DEIS. This is a fundamental shift in reasoning of how alternatives are evaluated. 
NMFS should: 

• Address why a previously rejected alternative (limiting number of surveys) has become 
the basis for ALL alternatives currently under consideration; and 

• Explain the reasoning behind the change in analysis method. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 12 
Comment Analysis Report 

If NMFS cannot adequately address this discrepancy, they should consider withdrawing the 
current DEIS and initiating a new analysis that does not focus on limiting program numbers 
as a means of reducing impacts. 

ALT 17 The DEIS improperly dismisses the alternative “Caps on Levels of Activities and/or Noise.” 
As NMFS has recognized, oil and gas-related disturbances in the marine environment can 
result in biologically significant impacts depending upon the timing, location, and number of 
the activities. Yet the DEIS declines even to consider an alternative limiting the amount of 
activity that can be conducted in the Arctic, or part of the Arctic, over a given period. The 
“soundscape” of the Arctic should be relatively easy to describe and manage compared to the 
soundscapes of other regions, and should be included in the EIS. 

The agencies base their rejection of this alternative not on the grounds that it exceeds their 
legal authority, but that it does not meet the purpose and need of the EIS. Instead of 
developing an activity cap alternative for the EIS, the agencies propose, in effect, to consider 
overall limits on activities when evaluating individual applications under OCSLA and the 
MMPA. It would, however, be much more difficult for NMFS or BOEM to undertake that 
kind of analysis in an individual IHA application or OCSLA exploration plan because the 
agencies often lack sufficient information before the open water season to take an 
overarching view of the activities occurring that year. Determining limits at the outset would 
also presumably reduce uncertainty for industry. In short, excluding any consideration of 
activity caps from the alternatives analysis in this EIS frustrates the purpose of programmatic 
review, contrary to NEPA. NMFS claims that there is inadequate data to quantify impacts to 
support a cumulative noise cap should serve to limit authorizations rather than preventing a 
limit on activity. 

ALT 18 The DEIS improperly dismisses the alternative “Permanent Closures of Areas.” BOEM’s 
relegation of this alternative to the leasing process is not consistent with its obligation, at the 
exploration and permit approval stage, to reject applications that would cause serious harm or 
undue harm. It is reasonable here for BOEM to define areas whose exploration would exceed 
these legal thresholds regardless of time of year, just as it defines areas for seasonal 
avoidance pursuant to other OCSLA and MMPA standards. Regardless, the lease sale stage is 
not a proper vehicle for considering permanent exclusions for strictly off-lease activities, such 
as off-lease seismic surveys. At the very least, the DEIS should consider establishing 
permanent exclusion areas, or deferring activity within certain areas, outside the boundaries 
of existing lease areas. 

ALT 19 The DEIS improperly dismisses the alternative “Duplicative Surveys.” NMFS’ Open Water 
Panel has twice called for the elimination of unnecessary, duplicative surveys, whether 
through data sharing or some other means. Yet the DEIS pleads that BOEM cannot adopt this 
measure, on the grounds that the agency cannot “require companies to share proprietary data, 
combine seismic programs, change lease terms, or prevent companies from acquiring data in 
the same geographic area.” This analysis overlooks BOEM’s statutory duty under OCSLA to 
approve only those permits whose exploration activities are not unduly harmful to marine 
life. While OCSLA does not define the standard, it is difficult to imagine an activity more 
expressive of undue harm than a duplicative survey, which obtains data that the government 
and industry already possess and therefore is not necessary to the expeditious and orderly 
development, subject to environmental safeguards, of the outer continental shelf. There is 
nothing in OCSLA that bars BOEM from incentivizing the use of common surveyors or data 
sharing, as already occurs in the Gulf of Mexico, to reduce total survey effort. It is thus 
within BOEM’s authority to decline to approve individual permit applications in whole or 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 13 
Comment Analysis Report 

part that it finds are unnecessarily duplicative of existing or proposed surveys or data. NMFS 
and BOEM should consider various strategies for avoiding unnecessarily redundant seismic 
surveys as a way of ensuring the least practicable impact on marine mammals and the 
environment. Companies that conduct geophysical surveys for the purpose of selling the data 
could make those data available to multiple companies, avoiding the need for each company 
to commission separate surveys. 

ALT 20 NMFS should include a community-based alternative that establishes direct reliance on the 
Conflict Avoidance Agreement (CAA), and the collaborative process that has been used to 
implement it. The alternative would include a fully developed suite of mitigation measures 
similar to what is included in each annual CAA. This alternative would also include: 

• A communications scheme to manage industry and hunter vessel traffic during whale 
hunting; 

• Time-area closures that provide a westward-moving buffer ahead of the bowhead 
migration in areas important for fall hunting by our villages; 

• Vessel movement restrictions and speed limitations for industry vessels moving in the 
vicinity of migrating whales; 

• Limitations on levels of specific activities; 
• Limitations on discharges in near-shore areas where food is taken and eaten directly from 

the water; 
• Other measures to facilitate stakeholder involvement; and 
• An annual adaptive decision making process where the oil industry and Native groups 

come together to discuss new information and potential amendments to the mitigation 
measures and/or levels of activity. 

NMFS should also include a more thorough discussion of the 20-year history of the CAA to 
provide better context for assessing the potential benefits of this community-based 
alternative. 

ALT 21 NMFS should include an alternative in the Final EIS that blends the following components of 
the existing DEIS alternatives, which is designed to benefit subsistence hunting: 

• Alternative 2 activity levels; 
• Mandatory time/area closures of Alternative 4; 
• Alternative technologies from Alternative 5; 
• Zero discharge in the Beaufort Sea; 
• Limitation on vessel transit into the Chukchi Sea; 
• Protections for the subsistence hunt in Wainwright, Point Hope, and Point Lay; 
• Sound source verification; 
• Expanded exclusion zones for seismic activities; and 
• Limitations on limited visibility operation of seismic equipment. 

ALT 22 NMFS should include an alternative in the Final EIS that is based on the amount of 
anthropogenic sounds that marine mammals might be exposed to, rather than using numbers 
of activities as a proxy for sound. This alternative, based on accumulation of sound exposure 
level, could evaluate: 

• Different types and numbers of industrial activities; 
• Different frequencies produced by each activity; 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 14 
Comment Analysis Report 

• Location of activities; 
• Timing of activities; 
• Overlap in time and space with marine mammals; and 
• Knowledge about how marine mammals respond to anthropogenic activities. 

Threshold levels could be based on simulation modeling using the above information. This 
approach would use a valid scientific approach, one that is at least as robust, and probably 
more, than the current approach of simply assessing numbers of activities. 

ALT 23 NMFS has defined a seismic "program" as limited to no more than two source vessels 
working in tandem. This would expand the duration required to complete a program, which 
could increase the potential for environmental impacts, without decreasing the amount of 
sound in the water at any one time. NMFS should not limit the number of source vessels used 
in a program in this manner as it could limit exploration efficiencies inherent in existing 
industry practice. 

ALT 24 NMFS should not limit the number of on ice surveys that can be acquired in any year, in 
either the Beaufort or Chukchi seas, as it could limit exploration efficiencies inherent in 
existing industry practice. 

ALT 25 The DEIS alternatives also limit the number of drilling operations each year regardless of the 
type of drilling. Given that there are many different approaches to drilling, each with its own 
unique acoustic footprint and clear difference in its potential to generate other environmental 
effects, a pre-established limit on the number of drilling operations each year is not based on 
a scientific assessment and therefore is unreasonable. NMFS should not limit the number of 
drilling operations. 

ALT 26 By grouping 2D / 3D seismic surveys and Controlled Source Electro-Magnetic (CSEM) 
surveys together, the DEIS suggests that these two survey types are interchangeable, produce 
similar types of data and/or have similar environmental impact characteristics. This is 
incorrect and the DEIS should be corrected to separate them and, if the alternatives propose 
limits, then each survey type should be dealt with separately. 

ALT 27 NMFS should consider a phased, adaptive approach to increasing the number of surveys in 
the region because the cumulative effects of seismic surveys are not clear. Such an approach 
would provide an opportunity to monitor and manage effects before they become significant 
and also would help prevent situations where the industry has over-committed its resources to 
activities that may cause unacceptable harm. 

ALT 28 In the Final EIS, NMFS should identify its preferred alternative, including the rationale for its 
selection. 

ALT 29 NMFS must consider alternatives that do not contain the Additional Mitigation Measures 
currently associated with every action alternative in the DEIS. These measures are not 
warranted, are not scientifically supported, and are onerous, prohibiting exploration activities 
over extensive areas for significant portions of the open water season. 

ALT 30 Alternatives 2 and 3 identify different assumed levels of annual oil and gas activity. Varying 
ranges of oil and gas activity are not alternatives to proposal for incidental take 
authorizations. NMFS should revise the alternatives to more accurately reflect the Purpose 
and Need of the EIS. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 15 
Comment Analysis Report 

ALT 31 The levels of activity identified in Alternatives 2 and 3 go far above and beyond anything that 
has been seen in the Arctic to date. The DEIS as written preemptively approves specific 
levels of industrial activity. This action is beyond NMFS’ jurisdiction, and the alternatives 
should be revised to reflect these concerns. 

ALT 32 The analysis in the DEIS avoids proposing a beneficial conservation alternative and 
consistently dilutes the advantages of mitigation measures that could be used as part of such 
an alternative. NEPA requires that agencies explore alternatives that “will avoid or minimize 
adverse effects of these actions upon the quality of the human environment.” Such an 
alternative could require all standard and additional mitigation measures, while adding limits 
such as late-season drilling prohibitions to protect migrating bowhead whales and reduce the 
harm from an oil spill. NMFS should consider analyzing such an alternative in the Final EIS. 

ALT 33 NMFS should pair the additional mitigation measures with the Level 1 exploration of 
Alternative 2 and not support higher levels of exploration of Alternatives 3-5. 

ALT 34 NMFS should create an alternative modeled off of the adaptive management process of the 
CAA. Without doing so, the agency cannot fully analyze and consider the benefits provided 
by this community based, collaborative approach to managing multiple uses on the Outer 
Continental Shelf. 

ALT 35 Allowing only one or two drilling programs per sea to proceed: Since six operators hold 
leases in the Chukchi and 18 in the Beaufort, the DEIS effectively declares as worthless 
leases associated with four Chukchi operators and 16 Beaufort operators. How NMFS expects 
to choose which operators can work is not clear, nor is it clear how it would compensate 
those operators not chosen for the value of their lease and resources expenditures to date. 

ALT 36 While it is reasonable to assume that many outstanding leases will not ultimately result in 
development (or even exploration), NMFS should have truth-tested with its cooperating 
agency whether the maximum level of activity it assumed was, in fact, a reasonable 
assumption of the upper limit on anticipated activity. BOEM would have been able to provide 
NMFS with guidance on one of these leases. Use of a properly constructed scenario would 
have provided NMFS with a more realistic understanding of the level of activity necessary to 
allow current leaseholders an opportunity to develop their leases within the lease terms. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 16 
Comment Analysis Report 

Cumulative Effects (CEF) 
CEF Comments related to cumulative impacts in general or for a specific resource. 

CEF 1 NMFS should review cumulative effects section; many “minor” and “negligible” impacts can 
combine to be more than “minor” or “negligible”. 

CEF 2 Adverse cumulative effects need to be considered in more depth for: 

• Fisheries and prey species for marine mammals; 
• Marine mammals and habitat; 
• Wildlife in general; 
• North Slope communities; 
• Migratory pathways of marine mammals; 
• Subsistence resources and traditional livelihoods. 

CEF 3 A narrow focus on oil and gas activities is likely to underestimate the overall level of impact 
on the bowhead whale. Bowhead whales are long-lived and travel great distances during their 
annual migration, leaving them potentially exposed to a wide range of potential 
anthropogenic impacts and cumulative effects over broad geographical and temporal scales. 
An Ecosystem Based Management approach would better regulate the totality of potential 
impacts to wildlife habitat and ecosystem services in the Arctic. 

CEF 4 NMFS should include more in its cumulative effects analysis regarding the impacts caused 
by: 

• Climate change; 
• Oil Spills; 
• Ocean noise; 
• Planes; 
• Transportation in general; 
• Discharge; 
• Assessments/research/monitoring; 
• Dispersants; 
• Invasive species. 

CEF 5 The cumulative effects analysis overall in the DEIS is inadequate. Specific comments 
include: 

• The DEIS fails to develop a coherent analytical framework by which impacts are 
assessed and how decisions are made; 

• The cumulative impact section does not provide details about what specific methodology 
was used; 

• The cumulative effects analysis does not adequately assess the impacts from noise, 
air/water quality, subsistence, and marine mammals; 

• The list of activities is incomplete; 
• The assessment of impacts to employment/socioeconomics/income are not considered in 

assessment of cumulative impacts for any alternative other than the no action alternative; 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 17 
Comment Analysis Report 

• The industry has not shown that their activities will have no cumulative, adverse and 
unhealthy effects upon the animals, the air, the waters nor the peoples of the Coastal 
Communities in the Arctic; 

• The analysis on seals and other pinnipeds is inadequate and is not clear on whether 
potential listings were considered; 

• Recent major mortality events involving both walrus and ice seals must be considered 
when determining impacts. A negligible impact determination cannot be made without 
more information about these disease events. 

CEF 6 The cumulative effects analyzed are overestimated. Specific comments include: 

• There is no evidence from over 60 years of industry activities that injurious cumulative 
sound levels occur; 

• Given that the seismic vessel is moving in and out of a localized area and the fact that 
animals are believed to avoid vessel traffic and seismic sounds, cumulative sound 
exposure is again likely being overestimated in the DEIS; 

• Cumulative impacts from oil and gas activities are generally prescriptive, written to limit 
exploration activities during the short open water season. 

CEF 7 There is a lack of studies on the adverse and cumulative effects on communities, ecosystems, 
air/water quality, subsistence resources, economy, and culture. NMFS should not authorize 
Incidental Harassment Authorizations without adequate scientific data. 

CEF 8 Adverse cumulative effects need to be considered in more depth for marine mammals and 
habitat, specifically regarding: 

• Oil and gas activities in the Canadian Beaufort and the Russian Chukchi Sea; 
• Entanglement with fishing gear; 
• Increased vessel traffic; 
• Discharge; 
• Water/Air pollution; 
• Sources of underwater noise; 
• Climate change; 
• Ocean acidification; 
• Production structures and pipelines. 

CEF 9 The DEIS does not adequately analyze the cumulative and synergistic effects of exploration 
noise impacts to marine mammals. Specific comments include: 

• The DEIS only addresses single impacts to individual animals. In reality a whale does not 
experience a single noise in a stationary area as the DEIS concludes but is faced with a 
dynamic acoustic environment which all must be factored into estimating exposure not 
only to individuals but also to populations; 

• While each individual vessel or platform can be considered a single, periodic or transient 
source of noise, all components are required to successfully complete the operation. As a 
result, the entire operation around a drilling ship or drilling platform will need to be 
quieter than 120 dB in order to be below NMFS disturbance criteria for continuous noise 
exposure; 

• A full characterization of risk to marine mammals from the impacts of noise will be a 
function of the sources of noise in the marine and also the cumulative effects of multiple 
sources of noise and the interaction of other risk factors; 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 18 
Comment Analysis Report 

• The DEIS does not incorporate chronic stress into its cumulative impact analysis, such as 
by using other species as proxies for lower life expectancies; 

• The DEIS fails to consider the impacts of noise on foraging and energetics; 
• Because the acoustic footprint of seismic operations is so large, it is quite conceivable 

that bowhead whales could be exposed to seismic operations in the Canadian Beaufort, 
the Alaskan Beaufort, and the Chukchi Sea; and 

• An Arctic sound budget should include any noise that could contribute to a potential take, 
not simply seismic surveying, oil and gas drilling, and ice management activities. 

CEF 10 The DEIS does not adequately analyze the combined effects of multiple surveying and 
drilling operations taking place in the Arctic Ocean year after year. 

CEF 11 NMFS should include the following in the cumulative effects analysis: 

• Current and future activities including deep water port construction by the military, the 
opening of the Northwest Passage, and production at BP’s Liberty prospect; 

• Past activities including past activities in the Arctic for which NMFS has issued IHAs; 
commercial shipping and potential deep water port construction; production of offshore 
oil and gas resources or production related activities; and commercial fishing; 

• A baseline for analysis of current activities and past IHAs; 
• Recent studies: a passive acoustic monitoring study conducted by Scripps, and NOAA’s 

working group on cumulative noise mapping; 
• Ecosystem mapping of the entire project. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 19 
Comment Analysis Report 

Coordination and Compatibility (COR) 
COR Comments on compliance with statues, laws or regulations and Executive Orders that should 

be considered; coordinating with federal, state, or local agencies, organizations, or potential 
applicants; permitting requirements. 

COR 1 Continued government to government consultation needs to include: 

• Increased focus on how NMFS and other federal agencies are required to protect natural 
resources and minimize the impact of hydrocarbon development to adversely affect 
subsistence hunting. 

• More consultations are needed with the tribes to incorporate their traditional knowledge 
into the DEIS decision making process. 

• Direct contact between NMFS and Kotzebue IRA, Iñupiat Community of the Arctic 
Slope (ICAS) and Native Village of Barrow should be initiated by NMFS. 

• Tribal organizations should be included in meeting with stakeholders and cooperating 
agencies. 

• Consultation should be initiated early and from NOAA/NMFS, not through their 
contractor. Meetings should be in person. 

COR 2 Data and results that are gathered should be shared throughout the impacted communities. 
Often, adequate data are not shared and therefore perceived inaccurate. Before and after an 
IHA is authorized, communities should receive feedback from industry, NMFS, and marine 
observers. 

COR 3 There needs to be a permanent system of enforcement and reporting for marine mammal 
impacts to ensure that oil companies are complying with the terms of the IHA and threatened 
and endangered species authorizations. This system needs to be developed and implemented 
in collaboration with the North Slope Borough and the ICAS and should be based on the 
CAAs. 

COR 4 The U.S. and Canada needs to adopt an integrated and cooperative approach to impact 
assessment of hydrocarbon development in the Arctic. NMFS should coordinate with the 
Toktoyaktuk and the Canadian government because of the transboundary impacts of 
exploratory activities and the U.S. non-binding co-management agreements with indigenous 
peoples in Canada (Alaska Beluga Whale Committee and Nunavut Wildlife Management 
Board). 

COR 5 The State of Alaska should be consulted and asked to join the DEIS team as a Cooperating 
Agency because the DEIS addresses the potential environmental impacts of oil and gas 
exploration in State water and because operators on state lands must comply with the MMPA. 

COR 6 NMFS should develop a mechanism to ensure that there is a coordinated effort by federal and 
state agencies, industry, affected communities, and non-governmental organizations and 
stakeholders to improve the integration of scientific data and develop a comprehensive, long-
term monitoring program for the Arctic ecosystem. 

COR 7 Effort should be put towards enhancing interagency coordination for managing noise. 
Improved communication among federal agencies involved in noise impact assessment would 
enhance compliance with the US National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 20 
Comment Analysis Report 

(NTTAA). The NTTAA promotes the use of consensus-based standards rather than agency-
specific standards whenever possible and/or appropriate. 

COR 8 It is recommended that BOEM have more than a cooperating agency role since the proposed 
action includes BOEM issuance of G&G permits. NMFS coordinate with BOEM on the 
following activities: 

• To conduct supplemental activity-specific environmental analyses under NEPA that 
provides detailed information on proposed seismic surveys and drilling activities and the 
associated environmental effects. 

• Ensure that the necessary information is available to estimate the number of takes as 
accurately as possible given current methods and data. 

• Make activity-specific analyses available for public review and comment rather than 
issuing memoranda to the file or categorical exclusions that do not allow for public 
review/comment. 

• Encourage BOEM to make those analyses available for public review and comment 
before the Service makes its final determination regarding applications for incidental take 
authorizations. 

COR 9 NMFS should integrate its planning and permitting decisions with coastal and marine spatial 
planning efforts for the Arctic region. 

COR 10 NMFS needs to coordinate with the oil and gas industry to identify the time period that the 
assessment will cover, determine how the information will be utilized, and request a range of 
activity levels that companies / operators might undertake in the next five years. 

COR 11 It is requested that the DEIS clarify how in the DEIS the appropriate mechanism for 
considering exclusion areas from leasing can be during the BOEM request for public 
comments on its Five Year OCS Leasing Plan when the recent BOEM Draft EIS Five Year 
Plan refused to consider additional deferral areas. In that document, BOEM eliminated 
additional details from further analysis by stating that it would consider the issue further as 
part of lease sale decisions. 

COR 12 The DEIS needs to be revised to comply with Executive Order 13580, "Interagency Working 
Group on Coordination of Domestic Energy Development and Permitting in Alaska," issued 
on July 12, 2011 by President Obama. It is felt that the current DEIS is in noncompliance 
because it does not assess a particular project, is duplicative, creates the need for additional 
OCS EIS documents, and is based upon questionable authority. 

COR 13 Consultation with USGS would help NMFS make a more informed prediction regarding the 
likelihood and extent of successful exploration and development in the project area and thus 
affect the maximum level of activity it analyzed. 

COR 14 NMFS must consider the comments that BOEM received on the five-year plan draft EIS as 
well as the plan itself before extensively relying on the analysis, specifically for its oil spill 
analysis. 

COR 15 NMFS should consult with the AEWC about how to integrate the timing of the adaptive 
management process with the decisions to be made by both NMFS and BOEM regarding 
annual activities. This would avoid the current situation where agencies often ask for input 
from local communities on appropriate mitigation measures before the offshore operators and 
AEWC have conducted annual negotiations. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 21 
Comment Analysis Report 

COR 16 NMFS should adopt an ecosystem based management approach consistent with the policy 
objectives of the MMPA and the policy objectives of the Executive Branch and President 
Obama's Administration. 

COR 17 The EIS should have better clarification that a Very Large Oil Spill (VLOS) are violations of 
the Clean Water Act and illegal under a MMPA permit. 

COR 18 NMFS should include consultation with other groups of subsistence hunters in the affected 
area, including the Village of Noatak and indigenous peoples in Canada. 

COR 19 NMFS should contract with smaller village corporation in regards to biological studies and 
work to help communities feel their local expertise is being utilized. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 22 
Comment Analysis Report 

Data (DAT) 
DATA Comments referencing scientific studies that should be considered. 

DATA 1 NMFS should consider these additional references regarding effects to beluga whales: 

[Effects of noise] Christine Erbe and David M. Farmer, Zones of impact around icebreakers 
affecting beluga whales in the Beaufort Sea. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 108 (3), Pt. 1 p.1332 

[avoidance] Findley, K.J., Miller, G.W., Davis, R.A., and Greene, C.R., Jr., Reactions of 
belugas, Delphinapterus leucas, and narwhals, Monodon monoceros, to ice-breaking ships in 
the Canadian high Arctic, Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 224: 97-117 (1990); see also Cosens, S.E., 
and Dueck, L.P., Ice breaker noise in Lancaster Sound, NWT, Canada:  implications for 
marine mammal behavior, Mar. Mamm. Sci. 9: 285-300 (1993). 

[beluga displacement]See, e.g., Fraker, M.A., The 1976 white whale monitoring program, 
MacKenzie estuary, report for Imperial Oil, Ltd., Calgary (1977); Fraker, M.A., The 1977 
white whale monitoring program, MacKenzie estuary, report for Imperial Oil, Ltd., Calgary 
(1977); Fraker, M.A., The 1978 white whale monitoring program, MacKenzie estuary, report 
for Imperial Oil, Ltd., Calgary (1978); Stewart, B.S., Evans, W.E., and Awbrey, F.T., Effects 
of man-made water-borne noise on the behaviour of beluga whales, Delphinapterus leucas, in 
Bristol Bay, Alaska, Hubbs Sea World (1982) (report 82-145 to NOAA); Stewart, B.S., 
Awbrey, F.T., and Evans, W.E., Belukha whale (Delphinapterus leucas) responses to 
industrial noise in Nushagak Bay, Alaska: 1983 (1983); Edds, P.L., and MacFarlane, J.A.F., 
Occurrence and general behavior of balaenopterid cetaceans summering in the St. Lawrence 
estuary, Canada, Can. J. Zoo. 65: 1363-1376 (1987). 

[beluga displacement] Miller, G.W., Moulton, V.D., Davis, R.A., Holst, M., Millman, P., 
MacGillivray, A., and Hannay. D., Monitoring seismic effects on marine mammals - 
southeastern Beaufort Sea, 2001-2002, in Armsworthy, S.L., et al. (eds.),Offshore oil and gas 
environmental effects monitoring/Approaches and technologies, at 511-542 (2005). 

DATA 2 NMFS should consider these additional references regarding the general effects of noise, 
monitoring during seismic surveys and noise management as related to marine mammals: 

[effects of noise] Jochens, A., D. Biggs, K. Benoit-Bird, D. Engelhaupt, J. Gordon, C. Hu, N. 
Jaquet, M. Johnson, R. Leben, B. Mate, P. Miller, J. Ortega-Ortiz, A. Thode, P. Tyack, and B. 
WÃ¼rsig. 2008. Sperm whale seismic study in the Gulf of Mexico: Synthesis report. U.S. 
Dept. of the Interior, Minerals Management Service, Gulf of Mexico OCS Region, New 
Orleans, LA. OCS Study MMS 2008-006. 341 pp. SWSS final report was centered on the 
apparent lack of large-scale effects of airguns (distribution of sperm whales on scales of 5-
100km were no different when airguns were active than when they were silent), but a key 
observation was that one D-tagged whale exposed to sound levels of 164dB re:1ÂµPa ceased 
feeding and remained at the surface for the entire four hours that the survey vessel was 
nearby, then dove to feed as soon as the airguns were turned off. 

[effects of noise] Miller, G.W., R.E. Elliott, W.R. Koski, V.D. Moulton, and W.J. 
Richardson. 1999. Whales. p. 5-1 – 5- 109 In W.J. Richardson, (ed.), Marine mammal and 
acoustical monitoring of Western Geophysical's openwater seismic program in the Alaskan 
Beaufort Sea, 1998. LGL Report TA2230-3. Prepared by LGL Ltd., King City, ONT, and 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 23 
Comment Analysis Report 

Greeneridge Sciences Inc., Santa Barbara, CA, for Western Geophysical, Houston, TX, and 
NMFS, Anchorage, AK, and Silver Spring, MD. 390 p. 

[effects of noise] Richardson, W.J., Greene Jr, C.R., Malme, C.I. and Thomson, D.H. 1995. 
Marine Mammals and Noise. Academic Press, San Diego. 576pp. 

[effects of noise] Holst, M., M.A. Smultea, W.R. Koski, and B. Haley. 2005. Marine mammal 
and sea turtle monitoring during Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory’s marine seismic 
program off the Northern Yucatan Peninsula in the Southern Gulf of Mexico, January 
February 2005. LGL Report TA2822-31. Prepared by LGL Ltd. environmental research 
associates, King City, ONT, for Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, 
Palisades, NY, and NMFS, Silver Spring, MD. June. 96 p. 

[marine mammals and noise] Balcomb III, KC, Claridge DE. 2001. A mass stranding of 
cetaceans caused by naval sonar in the Bahamas. Bahamas J. Sci. 8(2):2-12. 

[noise from O&G activities] Richardson, W.J., Greene Jr, C.R., Malme, C.I. and Thomson, 
D.H. 1995. Marine Mammals and Noise. Academic Press, San Diego. 576pp. 

A study on ship noise and marine mammal stress was recently issued. Rolland, R.M., Parks, 
S.E., Hunt, K.E., Castellote, M., Corkeron, P.J., Nowacek, D.P., Wasser, S.K., and Kraus, 
S.D., Evidence that ship noise increases stress in right whales, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences doi:10.1098/rspb.2011.2429 (2012). 

Lucke, K., Siebert, U., Lepper, P.A., and Blanchet, M.-A., Temporary shift in masked hearing 
thresholds in a harbor porpoise (Phocoena phocoena) after exposure to seismic airgun stimuli, 
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 125: 4060-4070 (2009). 

Gedamke, J., Gales, N., and Frydman, S., Assessing risk of baleen whale hearing loss from 
seismic surveys: The effect of uncertainty and individual variation, Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America 129:496-506 (2011). 

[re. relationship between TTS and PTS] Kastak, D., Mulsow, J., Ghoul, A., Reichmuth, C., 
Noise-induced permanent threshold shift in a harbor seal [abstract], Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America 123: 2986 (2008) (sudden, non-linear induction of permanent threshold 
shift in harbor seal during TTS experiment); Kujawa, S.G., and Liberman, M.C., Adding 
insult to injury: Cochlear nerve degeneration after ‘temporary’ noise-induced hearing loss, 
Journal of Neuroscience 29: 14077-14085 (2009) (mechanism linking temporary to 
permanent threshold shift). 

[exclusion zones around foraging habitat] See Miller, G.W., Moulton, V.D., Davis, R.A., 
Holst, M., Millman, P., MacGillivray, A., and Hannay. D. Monitoring seismic effects on 
marine mammals in the southeastern Beaufort Sea, 2001-2002, in Armsworthy, S.L., et 
al.(eds.), Offshore oil and gas environmental effects monitoring/Approaches and 
technologies, at 511-542 (2005). 

[passive acoustic monitoring limitations] See also Gillespie, D., Gordon, J., Mchugh, R., 
Mclaren, D., Mellinger, D.K., Redmond, P., Thode, A., Trinder, P., and Deng, X.Y., 
PAMGUARD: semiautomated, open source software for real-time acoustic detection and 
localization of ceteaceans, Proceedings of the Institute of Acoustics 30(5) (2008). 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 24 
Comment Analysis Report 

BOEM, Site-specific environmental assessment of geological and geophysical survey 
application no. L11-007for TGS-NOPEC Geophysical Company, at 22 (2011) (imposing 
separation distance in Gulf of Mexico, noting that purpose is to “allow for a corridor for 
marine mammal movement”). 

[harbor porpoise avoidance] Bain, D.E., and Williams, R., Long-range effects of airgun noise 
on marine mammals: responses as a function of received sound level and distance (2006) 
(IWC Sci. Comm. Doc. IWC/SC/58/E35); Kastelein, R.A., Verboom, W.C., Jennings, N., and 
de Haan, D., Behavioral avoidance threshold level of a harbor porpoise (Phocoena phocoena) 
for a continuous 50 kHz pure tone, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 123: 1858-
1861 (2008); Kastelein, R.A., Verboom, W.C., Muijsers, M., Jennings, N.V., and van der 
Heul, S., The influence of acoustic emissions for underwater data transmission on the 
behavior of harbour porpoises (Phocoena phocoena) in a floating pen, Mar. Enviro. Res. 59: 
287-307 (2005); Olesiuk, P.F., Nichol, L.M., Sowden, M.J., and Ford, J.K.B., Effect of the 
sound generated by an acoustic harassment device on the relative abundance and distribution 
of harbor porpoises (Phocoena phocoena) in Retreat Passage, British Columbia, Mar. Mamm. 
Sci. 18: 843-862 (2002). 

A special issue of the International Journal of Comparative Psychology (20:2-3) is devoted to 
the problem of noise-related stress response in marine mammals. For an overview published 
as part of that volume, see, e.g., A.J. Wright, N. Aguilar Soto, A.L. Baldwin, M. Bateson, 
C.M. Beale, C. Clark, T. Deak, E.F. Edwards, A. Fernandez, A. Godinho, L. Hatch, A. 
Kakuschke, D. Lusseau, D. Martineau, L.M. Romero, L. Weilgart, B. Wintle, G. Notarbartolo 
di Sciara, and V. Martin, Do marine mammals experience stress related to anthropogenic 
noise? (2007). 

[methods to address data gaps] Bejder, L., Samuels, A., Whitehead, H., Finn, H., and Allen, 
S., Impact assessment research: use and misuse of habituation, sensitization and tolerance in 
describing wildlife responses to anthropogenic stimuli, Marine Ecology Progress Series 
395:177-185 (2009). 

[strandings] Brownell, R.L., Jr., Nowacek, D.P., and Ralls, K., Hunting cetaceans with sound: 
a worldwide review, Journal of Cetacean Research and Management 10: 81-88 (2008); 
Hildebrand, J.A., Impacts of anthropogenic sound, in Reynolds, J.E. III, Perrin, W.F., Reeves, 
R.R., Montgomery, S., and Ragen, T.J., eds., Marine Mammal Research: Conservation 
beyond Crisis (2006). 

[effects of noise] Harris, R.E., T. Elliot, and R.A. Davis. 2007. Results of mitigation and 
monitoring program, Beaufort Span 2-D marine seismic program, open-water season 2006. 
LGL Rep. TA4319-1. Rep. from LGL Ltd., King City, Ont., for GX Technology Corp., 
Houston, TX. 48 p. 

Hutchinson and Ferrero (2011) noted that there were on-going studies that could help provide 
a basis for a sound budget. 

[refs regarding real-time passive acoustic monitoring to reduce ship strike] Abramson, L., 
Polefka, S., Hastings, S., and Bor, K., Reducing the Threat of Ship Strikes on Large 
Cetaceans in the Santa Barbara Channel Region and Channel Islands National Marine 
Sanctuary: Recommendations and Case Studies (2009) (Marine Sanctuaries Conservation 
Series ONMS-11-01); Silber, G.K., S. Bettridge, and D. Cottingham, ?Report of a workshop 
to identify and assess technologies to reduce ship strikes of large whales.? Providence, Rhode 
Island, July 8-10, 2008 (2009) (NOAA Technical Memorandum. NMFS-OPR-42). 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 25 
Comment Analysis Report 

[time/place restrictions] See, e.g., Letter from Dr. Jane Lubchenco, Undersecretary of 
Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, to Nancy Sutley, Chair, Council on Environmental 
Quality at 2 (Jan. 19, 2010); Agardy, T., et al., A Global Scientific Workshop on Spatio-
Temporal Management of Noise (October 2007). 

[seismic and ambient noise] Roth, E.H., Hildebrand, J.A., Wiggins, S.M., and Ross, D., 
Underwater ambient noise on the Chukchi Sea continental slope, Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America 131:104-110 (2012). 

Expert Panel Review of Monitoring and Mitigation and Protocols in Applications for 
Incidental Take Authorizations Related to Oil and Gas Exploration, including Seismic 
Surveys in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas. Anchorage, Alaska 22-26 March 2010. 

[refs regarding monitoring and safety zone best practices] Weir, C.R., and Dolman, S.J., 
Comparative review of the regional marine mammal mitigation guidelines implemented 
during industrial seismic surveys, and guidance towards a worldwide standard, Journal of 
International Wildlife Law and Policy 10: 1-27 (2007); Parsons, E.C.M., Dolman, S.J., Jasny, 
M., Rose, N.A., Simmonds, M.P., and Wright, A.J., A critique of the UK’s JNCC seismic 
survey guidelines for minimising acoustic disturbance to marine mammals: Best practice? 
Marine Pollution Bulletin 58: 643-651 (2009). 

[marine mammals and noise - aircraft] Ljungblad, D.K., Moore, S.E. and Van Schoik, D.R. 
1983. Aerial surveys of endangered whales in the Beaufort, eastern Chukchi and northern 
Bering Seas, 1982. NOSC Technical Document 605 to the US Minerals Management Service, 
Anchorage, AK. NTIS AD-A134 772/3. 382pp 

[marine mammals and noise - aircraft] Southwest Research Associates. 1988. Results of the 
1986-1987 gray whale migration and landing craft, air cushion interaction study program. 
USN Contract No. PO N62474-86-M-0942. Final Report to Nav. Fac. Eng. Comm., San 
Bruno, CA. Southwest Research Associates, Cardiff by the Sea, CA. 31pp. 

DATA 3 NMFS should consider these additional references regarding fish and the general effects of 
noise on fish: 

[effects of noise] Arill Engays, Svein Lakkeborg, Egil Ona, and Aud Vold Soldal. Effects of 
seismic shooting on local abundance and catch rates of cod (Gadus morhua) and haddock 
(Melanogrammus aeglefinus) Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 53: 2238 “2249 (1996). 

[animal adaptations to extreme environments- may not be relevant to EIS] Michael Tobler, 
Ingo Schlupp, Katja U. Heubel, Radiger Riesch, Francisco J. Garca de Leon, Olav Giere and 
Martin Plath. Life on the edge: hydrogen sulfide and the fish communities of a Mexican cave 
and surrounding waters 2006 Extremophiles Journal, Volume 10, Number 6, Pages 577-585 

[response to noise] Knudsen, F.R., P.S. Enger, and O. Sand. 1994. Avoidance responses to 
low frequency sound in downstream migrating Atlantic salmon smolt, Salmo salar. Journal of 
Fish Biology 45:227-233. 

See also Fish Fauna in nearshore water of a barrier island in the western Beaufort Sea, 
Alaska. SW Johnson, JF Thedinga, AD Neff, and CA Hoffman. US Dept of Commerce, 
NOAA. Technical Memorandum NMFS-AFSC-210. July 2010. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 26 
Comment Analysis Report 

[airgun impacts and fish] McCauley, R.D., Fewtrell, J., Duncan, A.J., Jenner, C., Jenner, M.-
N., Penrose, J.D., Prince, R.I.T., Adhitya, A., Murdoch, J., and McCabe, K., Marine seismic 
surveys: Analysis and propagation of air-gun signals; and effects of air-gun exposure on 
humpback whales, sea turtles, fishes and squid (2000) (industry-sponsored study undertaken 
by researchers at the Curtin University of Technology, Australia). Lakkeborg, S., Ona, E., 
Vold, A., Pena, H., Salthaug, A., Totland, B., Ãvredal, J.T., Dalen, J. and Handegard, N.O., 
Effects of seismic surveys on fish distribution and catch rates of gillnets and longlines in 
Vesterlen in summer 2009 (2010) (Institute of Marine Research Report for Norwegian 
Petroleum Directorate). Slotte, A., Hansen, K., Dalen, J., and Ona, E., Acoustic mapping of 
pelagic fish distribution and abundance in relation to a seismic shooting area off the 
Norwegian west coast, Fisheries Research 67:143-150 (2004). Skalski, J.R., Pearson, W.H., 
and Malme, C.I., Effects of sounds from a geophysical survey device on catch-perunit-effort 
in a hook-and-line fishery for rockfish (Sebastes ssp.), Canadian Journal of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences 49: 1357-1365 (1992). McCauley et al., Marine seismic surveys: analysis 
and propagation of air-gun signals, and effects of air-gun exposure; McCauley, R., Fewtrell, 
J., and Popper, A.N., High intensity anthropogenic sound damages fish ears, Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America 113: 638-642 (2003); see also Scholik, A.R., and Yan, H.Y., 
Effects of boat engine noise on the auditory sensitivity of the fathead minnow, Pimephales 
promelas, Environmental Biology of Fishes 63: 203-209 (2002). Purser, J., and Radford, 
A.N., Acoustic noise induces attention shifts and reduces foraging performance in 
threespined sticklebacks (Gasterosteus aculeatus), PLoS One, 28 Feb. 2011, DOI: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0017478 (2011). Dalen, J., and Knutsen, G.M., Scaring effects on fish 
and harmful effects on eggs, larvae and fry by offshore seismic explorations, in Merklinger, 
H.M., Progress in Underwater Acoustics 93-102 (1987); Banner, A., and Hyatt, M., Effects of 
noise on eggs and larvae of two estuarine fishes, Transactions of the American Fisheries 
Society 1:134-36 (1973); L.P. Kostyuchenko, Effect of elastic waves generated in marine 
seismic prospecting on fish eggs on the Black Sea, Hydrobiology Journal 9:45-48 (1973). 

Recent work performed by Dr. Brenda Norcross (UAF) for MMS/BOEM. There are 
extensive data deficiencies for most marine and coastal fish population abundance and trends 
over time. I know because I conducted such an exercise for the MMS in the mid 2000s and 
the report is archived as part of lease sale administrative record. Contact Kate Wedermeyer 
(BOEM) or myself for a copy if it cannot be located in the administrative record. 

DATA 4 NMFS should consider these additional references on the effects of noise on lower trophic 
level organisms: 

[effects of noise] Michel Andra, Marta Sola, Marc Lenoir, Merca¨ Durfort, Carme Quero, 
Alex Mas, Antoni Lombarte, Mike van der Schaar1, Manel Lpez-Bejar, Maria Morell, Serge 
Zaugg, and Ludwig Hougnigan. Low frequency sounds induce acoustic trauma in 
cephalopods. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. Nov. 2011V9 Iss.9 

[impacts of seismic surveys and other activities on invertebrates] See, e.g., McCauley, R.D., 
Fewtrell, J., Duncan, A.J., Jenner, C., Jenner, M.-N., Penrose, J.D., Prince, R.I.T., Adhitya, 
A., Murdoch, J., and McCabe, K., Marine seismic surveys: Analysis and propagation of air-
gun signals; and effects of air-gun exposure on humpback whales, sea turtles, fishes and 
squid (2000); Andra, M., Sola, M., Lenoir, M., Durfort, M., Quero, C., Mas, A., Lombarte, 
A., van der Schaar, M., Lapez-Bejar, M., Morell, M., Zaugg, S., and Hougnigan, L., Low-
frequency sounds induce acoustic trauma in cephalopods, Frontiers in Ecology and the 
Environment doi:10.1890/100124 (2011); Guerra, A., and Gonzales, A.F., Severe injuries in 
the giant squid Architeuthis dux stranded after seismic explorations, in German Federal 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 27 
Comment Analysis Report 

Environment Agency, International Workshop on the Impacts of Seismic Survey Activities 
on Whales and Other Marine Biota at 32-38 (2006) 

DATA 5 NMFS should consider these additional references on effects of noise on bowhead whales: 

[effects of noise] Richardson WJ, Miller GW, Greene Jr. CR 1999. Displacement of 
Migrating Bowhead Whales by Sounds from Seismic Surveys in Shallow Waters of the 
Beaufort Sea. J. of Acoust. Soc. of America. 106:2281. 

NMFS cites information from Richardson et al. (1995) which suggested that migrating 
bowhead whales may react at sound levels as low as 120 dB (RMS) re 1 uPa but fails to cite 
newer work by Christie et al. 2010 and Koski et al. 2009, cited elsewhere in the document, 
showing that migrating whales entered and moved through areas ensonified to 120-150 dB 
(RMS) deflecting only at levels of ~150 dB. Distances at which whales deflected were similar 
in both studies suggesting that factors other than just sound are important in determining 
avoidance of an area by migrating bowhead whales. This is a general problem with the EIS in 
that it consistently uses outdated information as part of the impact analysis, relying on 
previous analyses from other NMFS or MMS EIS documents conducted without the benefit 
of the new data. 

Additionally, we ask NMFS to respond to the results of a recent study of the impacts of noise 
on Atlantic Right whales, which found "a decrease in baseline concentrations of fGCs in right 
whales in association with decreased overall noise levels (6 dB) and significant reductions in 
noise at all frequencies between 50 and 150 Hz as a consequence of reduced large vessel 
traffic in the Bay of Fundy following the events of 9/11/01."68 This study of another baleen 
whale that is closely related to the bowhead whale supports traditional knowledge regarding 
the skittishness and sensitivity of bowhead whales to noise and documents that these 
reactions to noise are accompanied by a physiological stress response that could have broader 
implications for repeated exposures to noise as contemplated in the DEIS. 68 Rolland, R.M., 
et al. Evidence that ship noise increases stress in right whales. Proc. R. Soc. B (2012) 
(doi:lO.1098/rspb.2011.2429). Exhibit G. 

Bowhead Whale Aerial Survey Project (or BWASP) sightings show that whales are found 
feeding in many years on both sides of the Bay.158 Id. at 24, 67 (Brownlow Point); see also 
Ferguson et al., A Tale of Two Seas: Lessons from Multi-decadal Aerial Surveys for 
Cetaceans in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas (2011 PowerPoint) (slide 15), attached as Exh. 1. 
A larger version of the map from the PowerPoint is attached as Exh. 2 Industry surveys have 
also confirmed whales feeding west of Camden Bay in both 2007 and 2008.159 Shell, 
Revised Outer Continental Shelf Lease Exploration Plan, Camden Bay, Beaufort Sea, Alaska, 
Appendix F 3-79 (May 2011) (Beaufort EIA), available at http://boem.gov/Oil-and-Gas-
Energy-Program/Plans/Regional-Plans/Alaska-Exploration-Plans/2012-Shell-Beaufort-
EP/Index.aspx. 

[bowhead displacement] Miller, G.W., Elliot, R.E., Koski, W.R., Moulton, V.D., and 
Richardson W.J., Whales, in Richardson, W.J. (ed.),Marine Mammal and Acoustical 
Monitoring of Western Geophysical’s Open-Water Seismic Program in the Alaskan Beaufort 
Sea, 1998 (1999); Richardson, W.J., Miller, G.W., and Greene Jr., C.R., Displacement of 
migrating bowhead whales by sounds from seismic surveys in shallow waters of the Beaufort 
Sea, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 106:2281 (1999). 

Clark, C.W., and Gagnon, G.C., Considering the temporal and spatial scales of noise 
exposures from seismic surveys on baleen whales (2006) (IWC Sci. Comm. Doc. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 28 
Comment Analysis Report 

IWC/SC/58/E9); Clark, C.W., pers. comm. with M. Jasny, NRDC (Apr. 2010); see also 
MacLeod, K., Simmonds, M.P., and Murray, E., Abundance of fin (Balaenoptera physalus) 
and sei whales (B. Borealis) amid oil exploration and development off northwest Scotland, 
Journal of Cetacean Research and Management 8: 247-254 (2006). 

DATA 6 NMFS should review and incorporate these additional recent BOEM documents into the 
Final EIS: 

BOEM recently issued a Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement for Gulf of 
Mexico OCS Oil and Gas Lease Sale: 2012; Central Planning Area Lease Sale 216/222; 
Mexico OCS Oil and Gas Lease Sale: 2012; Central Planning Area Lease Sale 216/222 
(SEIS). This final SEIS for the GOM correctly concluded that, despite more than 50 years of 
oil and gas seismic and other activities, “there are no data to suggest that activities from the 
preexisting OCS Program are significantly impacting marine mammal populations.” 

DATA 7 The DEIS should be revised to discuss any and all NMFS or BOEM Information Quality Act 
(IQA) requirements/guidance that apply to oil and gas activities in the Arctic Ocean. The 
final EIS should discuss IQA requirements, and should state that these IQA requirements also 
apply to any third-party information that the agencies use or rely on to regulate oil and gas 
operations. The DEIS should be revised to discuss: 

• NMFS Instruction on NMFS Data Documentation, which states at pages 11-12 that all 
NMFS data disseminations must meet IQA guidelines. 

• NMFS Directive on Data and Information Management, which states at page 3: General 
Policy and Requirements A. Data are among the most valuable public assets that NMFS 
controls, and are an essential enabler of the NMFS mission. The data will be visible, 
accessible, and understandable to authorized users to support mission objectives, in 
compliance with OMB guidelines for implementing the Information Quality Act. 

• NMFS Instruction on Section 515 Pre-Dissemination Review and Documentation Form. 
• NMFS Instruction on Guidelines for Agency Administrative Records, which states at 

pages 2-3 that: The AR [Administrative Record] first must document the process the 
agency used in reaching its final decision in order to show that the agency followed 
required procedures. For NOAA actions, procedural requirements include The 
Information Quality Act. 

DATA 8 Information in the EIS should be updated and include information on PAMGUARD that has 
been developed by the International Association of Oil and Gas Producers Joint Industry 
Project. PAMGUARD is a software package that can interpret and display calls of vocalizing 
marine mammals, locate them by azimuth and range and identify some of them by species. 
These abilities are critical for detecting animals within safety zones and enabling shut-down. 

DATA 9 NMFS should utilize some of the new predictive modeling techniques that are becoming 
available to better describe and analyze the links between impacts experienced at the 
individual level to the population level. One example is the tool for sound and marine 
mammals; Acoustic Integration Models (AIMs) that estimate how many animals might be 
exposed to specific levels of sound. Furthermore, Ellison et al. (2011)34 suggest a three-
pronged approach that uses marine mammal behaviors to examine sound exposure and help 
with planning of offshore activities. Additionally, scenario-modeling tools such as EcoPath 
and EcoSim might help with modeling potential outcomes from different anthropogenic 
activities. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 29 
Comment Analysis Report 

DATA 10 NMFS should acknowledge that despite some advances in oil spill response technology, there 
is still a significant gap in the ability to either remove or burn oil in 30 to 70 percent ice 
cover. NMFS should review this gap which is documented in recent oil in ice field studies 
completed by SINTEF. 

DATA 11 NMFS should consider review and incorporation of the following document related to energy 
development: 

Energy [r]evolution: A Sustainable Energy Outlook: 2010 USA Energy Scenario. 
http://www.energyblueprint.info/1239.0.html 
http://www.energyblueprint.info/fileadmin/media/documents/national/2010/0910_gpi_E_R__
usa_report_10_lr.pdf?PHPSESSID=a403f5196a8bfe3a8eaf375d5c936a69 (PDF document, 
9.7 MB). 

DATA 12 NMFS should review their previous testimony and comments that the agency has provided on 
oil and gas exploration or similarly-related activities to ensure that they are not conflicting 
with what is presented in the DEIS. 

• [NMFS should review previous comments on data gaps they have provided] NMFS, 
Comments on Minerals Management Service (MMS) Draft EIS for the Chukchi Sea 
Planning Area “Oil and Gas Lease Sale 193 and Seismic Surveying Activities in the 
Chukchi Sea at 2 (Jan. 30, 2007) (NMFS LS 193 Cmts); NMFS, Comments on MMS 
Draft EIS for the Beaufort Sea and Chukchi Sea Planning Areas” Oil and Gas Lease 
Sales 209, 212, 217, and 221 at 3-5 (March 27, 2009) (NMFS Multi-Sale Cmts). 

• NMFS should review past comment submissions on data gaps, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Comments on the U.S. Department of the 
Interior/MMS Draft Proposed Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Oil and Gas Leasing 
Program for 2010-2015 at 9 (Sept. 9, 2009). 

• Past NEPA documents have concluded that oil and gas exploration in the Chukchi Sea 
and Beaufort Sea OCS in conjunction with existing mitigation measures (which do not 
include any of the Additional Mitigation Measures) are sufficient to minimize potential 
impacts to insignificant levels. 

DATA 13 NMFS should review past comment submissions on data gaps regarding: 

The DPEIS appears not to address or acknowledge the findings of the U.S. Geological Survey 
(USGS) June 2011 report “Evaluation of the Science Needs to Inform Decisions on Outer 
Continental Shelf Energy Development in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas, Alaska.” USGS 
reinforced that information and data in the Arctic are emerging rapidly, but most studies 
focus on subjects with small spatial and temporal extent and are independently conducted 
with limited synthesis. USGS recommended that refined regional understanding of climate 
change is required to help clarify development scenarios. 

This report found that basic data for many marine mammal species in the Arctic are still 
needed, including information on current abundance, seasonal distribution, movements, 
population dynamics, foraging areas, sea-ice habitat relationships, and age-specific vital rates. 
The need for such fundamental information is apparent even for bowhead whales, one of the 
better studied species in the Arctic. The report confirms that more research is also necessary 
to accurately assess marine mammal reactions to different types of noise and that more work 
is needed to characterize the seasonal and spatial levels of ambient noise in both the Beaufort 
and Chukchi seas.  Recognizing the scope and importance of the data gaps, the report states 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 30 
Comment Analysis Report 

that missing information serves as a major constraint to a defensible science framework for 
critical Arctic decision making. 

Regarding data gaps on Arctic species see, e.g., Joint Subcommittee on Ocean Science & 
Technology, Addressing the Effects of Human-Generated Sound on Marine Life: An 
Integrated Research Plan for U.S. Federal Agencies at 3 (Jan. 13, 2009), available at 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/oceans-mmnoise-IATF.pdf, 
(stating that the current status of science as to noise effects ?often results in estimates of 
potential adverse impacts that contain a high degree of uncertainty?); id. at 62-63 (noting the 
need for baseline information, particularly for Arctic marine species); 

National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling (Nat’l 
Commission), Deep Water: The Gulf Oil Disaster and the Future of Offshore Drilling, Report 
to the President at vii (Jan. 2011),available at 
http://www.oilspillcommission.gov/sites/default/files/documents/DEEPWATER_Reporttothe
President_FINAL.pdf (finding that “[s]cientific understanding of environmental conditions in 
sensitive environments . . . in areas proposed for more drilling, such as the Arctic, is 
inadequate”); 

National Commission, Offshore Drilling in the Arctic: Background and Issues for the Future 
Consideration of Oil and Gas Activities, Staff Working Paper No. 13 at 19,available at 
http://www.oilspillcommission.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Offshore%20Drilling%20in
%20the%20Arctic_Bac 
kground%20and%20Issues%20for%20the%20Future%20Consideration%20of%20Oil%20an
d%20Gas%20Activitie s_0.pdf (listing acoustics research on impacts to marine mammals as a 
?high priority?) 

DATA 14 NMFS should include further information on the environmental impacts of EM 
[Electromagnetic] surveys. Refer to the recently completed environmental impact assessment 
of Electromagnetic (EM) Techniques used for oil and gas exploration and production, 
available at http://www.iagc.org/EM-EIA. The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
concluded that EM sources as presently used have no potential for significant effects on 
animal groups such as fish, seabirds, sea turtles, and marine mammals. 

DATA 15 NMFS and BOEM risk assessors should consider the National Academy of Sciences report 
"Understanding Risk: Informing Decisions in a Democratic Society." for guidance. There are 
other ecological risk assessment experiences and approaches with NOAA, EPA, OMB and 
other agencies that would inform development of an improved assessment methodology. 
(National Research Council. Understanding Risk: Informing Decisions in a Democratic 
Society. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 1996). 

DATA 16 The following references should be reviewed by NMFS regarding takes and sound level 
exposures for marine mammals: 

Richardson et al. (2011) provides a review of potential impacts on marine mammals that 
concludes injury (permanent hearing damage) from airguns is extremely unlikely and 
behavioral responses are both highly variable and short-term. 

The growing scientific consensus is that seismic sources pose little risk of Level A takes 
(Southall, 2010; Richardson et al. 2011). Southall and Richardson recommended a Level A 
threshold, 230 dB re: 1 ÂµPa (peak) (flat) (or 198 dB re 1 ÂµPa2-s, sound exposure level) 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 31 
Comment Analysis Report 

The NRC’s expert panel assessment (NRC 2005) and further review as discussed by 
Richardson et al (2011) also support this position. 

The level of sound exposure that will induce behavioral responses may not directly equate to 
biologically significant disturbance; therefore additional consideration must be directed at 
response and significance (NRC 2005; Richardson et al. 2011; Ellison et al. 2011). To further 
complicate a determination of an acoustic Level B take, the animal’s surroundings and/or the 
activity (feeding, migrating, etc.) being conducted at the time they receive the sound rather 
than solely intensity levels may be as important for behavioral responses (Richardson et al 
2011). 

DATA 17 Reports regarding estimated reserves of oil and gas and impacts to socioeconomics that 
NMFS should consider including in the EIS include: 

NMFS should have consulted with the USGS, which recently issued a report on anticipated 
Arctic oil and gas resources (Bird et al. 2008) The USGS estimates that oil and gas reserves 
in the Arctic may be significant. This report was not referenced in the DEIS. 

Two studies by Northern Economics and the Institute for Social and Economic Research at 
the University of Alaska provide estimation of this magnitude (NE & ISER 2009; NE & 
ISER 2011). As a result, socioeconomic benefits are essentially not considered in assessment 
of cumulative impacts for any alternative other than the no-action alternative. This material 
deficiency in the DEIS must be corrected. 

Stephen R. Braund and Associates. 2009. Impacts and benefits of oil and gas development to 
Barrow, Nuiqsut, Wainwright, and Atqasuk Harvesters. Report to the North Slope Borough 
Department of Wildlife Management, PAGEO. Box 69, Barrow, AK.) 

DATA 18 NMFS should consider citing newer work by work by Christie et al. 2010 and Koski et al. 
2009 related to bowhead reactions to sound: 

NMFS cites information from Richardson et al. (1995) that suggested that migrating bowhead 
whales may react at sound levels as low as 120 dB (rms) re 1 uPa but fails to cite newer work 
by Christie et al. 2010 and Koski et al. 2009, cited elsewhere in the document, showing that 
migrating whales entered and moved through areas ensonified to 120-150 dB (rms) deflecting 
only at levels of ~150-160dB. 

For example, on Page 43 Section 4.5.1.4.2 the DEIS cites information from Richardson et al. 
(1995) that suggested that migrating bowhead whales may react to sound levels as low as 120 
dB (rms) re 1 uPa, but fails to cite newer work by Christie et al. (2010) and Koski et al. 
(2009), cited elsewhere in the document, showing that migrating whales entered and moved 
through areas ensonified to 120-150 dB (rms). In these studies bowhead whales deflected 
only at levels of ~150 dB (rms). 

As described earlier in this document, the flawed analysis on Page 43 Section 4.5.1.4.2 of the 
DEIS cites information from Richardson et al. (1995), but fails to cite newer work (Christie et 
al. 2010, Koski et al. 2009) that increases our perspective on the role of sound and its 
influences on marine mammals, specifically bowhead whales. 

The first full paragraph of Page 100 indicates that it is not known whether impulsive sounds 
affect reproductive rate or distribution and habitat use over periods of days or years. All 
evidence indicates that bowhead whale reproductive rates have remained strong despite 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 32 
Comment Analysis Report 

seismic programs being conducted in these waters for several decades (Gerber et al. 2007. 
Whales return to these habitat areas each year and continue to use the areas in similar ways. 
There has been no documented shift in distribution or use (Blackwell et al. 2010). The data 
that have been collected suggest that the impacts are short term and on the scale of hours 
rather than days or years (MMS 2007, MMS 2008a). 

DATA 19 The DEIS consistently fails to use new information as part of the impact analysis instead 
relying on previous analyses from other NMFS or MMS EIS documents conducted without 
the benefit of the new data. This implies a pre-disposition toward acceptance of supposition 
formed from overly conservative views without the benefit of robust review and toward 
rejection of any data not consistent with these views. 

DATA 20 NMFS should consider the incorporation of marine mammal concentration area maps 
provided as comments to the DEIS (by Oceana) as strong evidence for robust time and area 
closures should NMFS decide to move forward with approval of industrial activities in the 
Arctic. While the maps in the DEIS share some of the same sources as the enclosed maps, the 
concentration areas presented in the above referenced maps reflect additional new 
information, corrections, and discussions with primary researchers. These maps are based in 
part on the Arctic Marine Synthesis developed previously, but include some new areas and 
significant changes to others. 

DATA 21 NMFS should consider an updated literature search for the pack ice and ice gouges section of 
the EIS: 

Pages 3-6 to 3-7, Section 3.1.2.4 Pack Ice and Ice Gouges: An updated literature search 
should be completed for this section. In particular additional data regarding ice gouging 
published by MMS and Weeks et. al should be noted. The DEIS emphasizes ice gouging in 
20-30 meter water depth: "A study of ice gouging in the Alaskan Beaufort Sea showed that 
the maximum number of gouges occur in the 20 to 30m (66 to 99 ft) water-depth range 
(Machemehl and Jo 1989)." However, an OCS study commissioned by MMS (2006-059) 
noted that Leidersdorf, et al., (2001) examined ice gouges in shallower waters: 48 ice gouges 
exceeding the minimum measurement threshold of 0.1 m [that were] detected in the Northstar 
pipeline corridor. These were all in shallower waters (< 12 m) and the maximum incision 
depth was 0.4 m. "In all four years, however, measurable gouges were confined to water 
depths exceeding 5 m." These results are consistent with the earlier work, and these results 
are limited to shallow water. Thus, this study will rely on the earlier work by Weeks et al. 
which includes deeper gouges and deeper water depths. (Alternative Oil Spill Occurrence 
Estimators for the Beaufort/Chukchi Sea OCS (Statistical Approach) MMS Contract Number 
1435 - 01 - 00 - PO - 17141 September 5, 2006 TGE Consulting: Ted G. Eschenbach and 
William V. Harper). The DEIS should also reference the work by Weeks, including: Weeks, 
W.F., P.W. Barnes, D.M. Rearic, and E. Reimnitz, 1984, "Some Probabilistic Aspects of Ice 
Gouging on the Alaskan Shelf of the Beaufort Sea," The Alaskan Beaufort Sea: Ecosystems 
and Environments, Academic Press. Weeks, W.F., P.W. Barnes, D.M. Rearic, and E. 
Reimnitz, June 1983, "Some Probabilistic Aspects of Ice Gouging on the Alaskan Shelf of the 
Beaufort Sea," US Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory. 

DATA 22 NMFS should consider revisions to the EIS based on data provided below regarding ice seals: 

Page 4-387, Pinnipeds: Ringed seals and some bearded seals spend a fair amount of time 
foraging in the open ocean during maximum ice retreat (NSB unpublished data, 
http://www.northÂ¬ 
slope.org/departments/wildlife/Walrus%201ce%20Seals.php#RingedSeal, Crawford et al. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 33 
Comment Analysis Report 

2011, ADF&G unpublished data). Bearded seals are not restricted to foraging only in shallow 
areas on a benthic diet. Consumption of pelagic prey items does occur (ADF&G unpublished 
data, Lentfer 1988). 

Pages 4-388 Pinnipeds, and 4-392, Ringed Seal: Ringed seals are known to persist in the 
offshore pack ice during all times of the year (Crawford et al. 2011, NSB unpublished data, 
Lenter 1988). It has actually been suggested that there are two ecotypes, those that make a 
living in the pack ice and shore fast ice animals. This should be stated in one of these 
sections. 

NOAA, 2011 Arctic Seal Disease Outbreak Fact Sheet (updated Nov. 22, 2011) (Arctic Seal 
Outbreak Fact Sheet), available at 
http://alaskafisheries.noaa.gov/protectedresources/seals/ice/diseased/ume022012.pdf. NMFS 
has officially declared an “unusual mortality event” for ringed seals. 

DATA 23 NMFS should consider incorporation of the following references regarding vessel impacts on 
marine mammals: 

Renilson, M., Reducing underwater noise pollution from large commercial vessels (2009) 
available at www.ifaw.org/oceannoise/reports; Southall, B.L., and Scholik-Schlomer, A. eds. 
Final Report of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) International 
Symposium: Potential Application of Vessel Quieting Technology on Large Commercial 
Vessels, 1-2 May 2007, at Silver Springs, Maryland (2008) available at 
http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/pdfs/acoustics/vessel_symposium_report.pdf. 

[refs regarding vessel speed limits] Laist, D.W., Knowlton, A.R., Mead, J.G., Collet, A.S., 
and Podesta, M., Collisions between ships and whales, Marine Mammal Science 17:35-75 
(2001); Pace, R.M., and Silber, G.K., Simple analyses of ship and large whale collisions: 
Does speed kill? Biennial Conference on the Biology of Marine Mammals, December 2005, 
San Diego, CA. (2005) (abstract); Vanderlaan, A.S.M., and Taggart, C.T., Vessel collisions 
with whales: The probability of lethal injury based on vessel speed. Marine Mammal Science 
23:144-156 (2007); Renilson, M., Reducing underwater noise pollution from large 
commercial vessels (2009) available at www.ifaw.org/oceannoise/reports; Southall, B.L., and 
Scholik-Schlomer, A. eds. Final Report of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) International Symposium: Potential Application of Vessel-Quieting 
Technology on Large Commercial Vessels, 1-2 May 2007, at Silver Springs, Maryland 
(2008), available at 
http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/pdfs/acoustics/vessel_symposium_report.pdf; Thompson, 
M.A., Cabe, B., Pace III, R.M., Levenson, J., and Wiley, D., Vessel compliance and 
commitment with speed regulations in the US Cape Cod Bay and off Race Point Right Whale 
Seasonal Management Areas. Biennial Conference on the Biology of Marine Mammals, 
November-December 2011, Tampa, FL (2011) (abstract); National Marine Fisheries Service, 
NOAA. 2010 Large Whale Ship Strikes Relative to Vessel Speed. Prepared within NOAA 
Fisheries to support the Ship Strike Reduction Program (2010), available at 
http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/pdfs/shipstrike/ss_speed.pdf. 

[aerial monitoring and/or fixed hydrophone arrays] Id.; Hatch, L., Clark, C., Merrick, R., Van 
Parijs, S., Ponirakis, D., Schwehr, K., Thompson, M., and Wiley, D., Characterizing the 
relative contributions of large vessels to total ocean noise fields: a case study using the Gerry 
E. Studds Stellwagen Bank National Marine Sanctuary, Environmental Management 42:735-
752 (2008). 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 34 
Comment Analysis Report 

DATA 24 NMFS should review the references below regarding alternative technologies: 

Among the [alternative] technologies discussed in the 2009 [Okeanos] workshop report are 
engineering modifications to airguns, which can cut emissions at frequencies not needed for 
exploration; controlled sources, such as marine vibroseis, which can dramatically lower the 
peak sound currently generated by airguns by spreading it over time; various non-acoustic 
sources, such as electromagnetic and passive seismic devices, which in certain contexts can 
eliminate the need for sound entirely; and fiber-optic receivers, which can reduce the need for 
intense sound at the source by improving acquisition at the receiver. An industry-sponsored 
report by Noise Control Engineering made similar findings about the availability of greener 
alternatives to seismic airguns, as well as alternatives to a variety of other noise sources used 
in oil and gas exploration. 

Spence, J., Fischer, R., Bahtiarian, M., Boroditsky, L., Jones, N., and Dempsey, R., Review 
of existing and future potential treatments for reducing underwater sound from oil and gas 
industry activities (2007) (NCE Report 07-001) (prepared by Noise Control Engineering for 
Joint Industry Programme on E&P Sound and Marine Life). Despite the promise indicated in 
the 2007 and 2010 reports, neither NMFS nor BOEM has attempted to develop noise-
reduction technology for seismic or any other noise source, aside from BOEM’s failed 
investigation of mobile bubble curtains. 

[alternative technologies] Tenghamn, R., An electrical marine vibrator with a flextensional 
shell, Exploration Geophysics 37:286-291 (2006); LGL and Marine Acoustics, 
Environmental assessment of marine vibroseis (2011) (Joint Industry Programme contract 22 
07-12). 

DATA 25 NMFS should review the references below regarding masking: 

Clark, C.W., Ellison, W.T., Southall, B.L., Hatch, L., van Parijs, S., Frankel, A., and 
Ponirakis, D., Acoustic masking in marine ecosystems as a function of anthropogenic sound 
sources (2009) (IWC Sci. Comm. Doc.SC/61/E10); Clark, C.W., Ellison, W.T., Southall, 
B.L., Hatch, L., Van Parijs, S.M., Frankel, A., and Ponirakis, D., Acoustic masking in marine 
ecosystems: intuitions, analysis, and implication, Marine Ecology Progress Series 395: 201-
222 (2009); Williams, R., Ashe, E., Clark, C.W., Hammond, P.S., Lusseau, D., and Ponirakis, 
D., Inextricably linked: boats, noise, Chinook salmon and killer whale recovery in the 
northeast Pacific, presentation given at the Society for Marine Mammalogy Biennial 
Conference, Tampa, Florida, Nov. 29, 2011 (2011). 

DATA 26 NMFS should review the references below regarding acoustic thresholds: 

[criticism of threshold’s basis in RMS]Madsen, P.T., Marine mammals and noise: Problems 
with root-mean-squared sound pressure level for transients, Journal of the Acoustical Society 
of America 117:3952-57 (2005). 

Tyack, P.L., Zimmer, W.M.X., Moretti, D., Southall, B.L., Claridge, D.E., Durban, J.W., 
Clark, C.W., D’Amico, A., DiMarzio, N., Jarvis, S., McCarthy, E., Morrissey, R., Ward, J., 
and Boyd, I.L., Beaked whales respond to simulated and actual Navy sonar, PLoS ONE 
6(3):e17009.doi:10.13371/journal.pone.0017009 (2011)(beaked whales); Miller, P.J., 
Kvadsheim, P., Lam., F.-P.A., Tyack, P.L., Kuningas, S., Wensveen, P.J., Antunes, R.N., 
Alves, A.C., Kleivane, L., Ainslie, M.A., and Thomas, L., Developing dose-response 
relationships for the onset of avoidance of sonar by free-ranging killer whales (Orcinus orca), 
presentation given at the Society for Marine Mammalogy Biennial Conference, Tampa, 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 35 
Comment Analysis Report 

Florida, Dec. 2, 2011 (killer whales); Miller, P., Antunes, R., Alves, A.C., Wensveen, P., 
Kvadsheim, P., Kleivane, L., Nordlund, N., Lam, F.-P., van Ijsselmuide, S., Visser, F., and 
Tyack, P., The 3S experiments: studying the behavioural effects of navy sonar on killer 
whales (Orcinus orca), sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus), and long-finned pilot whales 
(Globicephala melas) in Norwegian waters, Scottish Oceans Institute Tech. Rep. SOI-2011-
001, available at soi.st-andrews.ac.uk (killer whales). See also, e.g., Fernandez, A., Edwards, 
J.F., Rodriguez, F., Espinosa de los Monteros, A., Herrez, P., Castro, P., Jaber, J.R., Martin, 
V., and Arbelo, M., Gas and Fat Embolic Syndrome - Involving a Mass Stranding of Beaked 
Whales (Family Ziphiidae) Exposed to Anthropogenic Sonar Signals, Veterinary Pathology 
42:446 (2005); Jepson, P.D., Arbelo, M., Deaville, R., Patterson, I.A.P., Castro, P., Baker, 
J.R., Degollada, E., Ross, H.M., Herrez, P., Pocknell, A.M., Rodriguez, F., Howie, F.E., 
Espinosa, A., Reid, R.J., Jaber, J.R., Martin, V., Cunningham, A.A., and Fernandez, A., Gas-
Bubble Lesions in Stranded Cetaceans, 425 Nature 575-576 (2003); Evans, P.G.H., and 
Miller, L.A., eds., Proceedings of the Workshop on Active Sonar and Cetaceans (2004) 
(European Cetacean Society publication); Southall, B.L., Braun, R., Gulland, F.M.D., Heard, 
A.D., Baird, R.W., Wilkin, S.M., and Rowles, T.K., Hawaiian Melon-Headed Whale 
(Peponacephala electra) Mass Stranding Event of July 3-4, 2004 (2006) (NOAA Tech. 
Memo. NMFS-OPR-31). 

DATA 27 NMFS should review the references below regarding real-time passive acoustic monitoring to 
reduce ship strike: 

Abramson, L., Polefka, S., Hastings, S., and Bor, K., Reducing the Threat of Ship Strikes on 
Large Cetaceans in the Santa Barbara Channel Region and Channel Islands National Marine 
Sanctuary: Recommendations and Case Studies (2009) (Marine Sanctuaries Conservation 
Series ONMS-11-01); Silber, G.K., S. Bettridge, and D. Cottingham, Report of a workshop to 
identify and assess technologies to reduce ship strikes of large whales. Providence, Rhode 
Island, July 8-10, 2008 (2009) (NOAA Technical Memorandum. NMFS-OPR-42). 

Lusseau, D., Bain, D.E., Williams, R., and Smith, J.C., Vessel traffic disrupts the foraging 
behavior of southern resident killer whales Orcinus orca, Endangered Species Research 6: 
211-221 (2009); Williams, R., Lusseau, D. and Hammond, P.S., Estimating relative energetic 
costs of human disturbance to killer whales (Orcinus orca), Biological Conservation 133: 
301-311 (2006); Miller, P.J.O., Johnson, M.P., Madsen, P.T., Biassoni, N., Quero, 
[energetics] M., and Tyack, P.L., Using at-sea experiments to study the effects of airguns on 
the foraging behavior of sperm whales in the Gulf of Mexico, Deep-Sea Research I 56: 1168-
1181 (2009). See also Mayo, C.S., Page, M., Osterberg, D., and Pershing, A., On the path to 
starvation: the effects of anthropogenic noise on right whale foraging success, North Atlantic 
Right Whale Consortium: Abstracts of the Annual Meeting (2008) (finding that decrements 
in North Atlantic right whale sensory range due to shipping noise have a larger impact on 
food intake than patch-density distribution and are likely to compromise fitness). 

[mid-frequency, ship strike] Nowacek, D.P., Johnson, M.P., and Tyack, P.L., North Atlantic 
right whales (Eubalaena glacialis) ignore ships but respond to alerting stimuli, Proceedings of 
the Royal Society of London, Part B: Biological Sciences 271:227 (2004). 

DATA 28 NMFS should review the references below regarding terrestrial mammals and stress response: 

Chang, E.F., and Merzenich, M.M., Environmental Noise Retards Auditory Cortical 
Development, 300 Science 498 (2003) (rats); Willich, S.N., Wegscheider, K., Stallmann, M., 
and Keil, T., Noise Burden and the Risk of Myocardial Infarction, European Heart Journal 
(2005) (Nov. 24, 2005) (humans); Harrington, F.H., and Veitch, A.M., Calving Success of 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 36 
Comment Analysis Report 

Woodland Caribou Exposed to Low-Level Jet Fighter Overflights, Arctic 45:213 (1992) 
(caribou). 

DATA 29 NMFS should review the references below regarding the inappropriate reliance on adaptive 
management: 

Taylor, B.L., Martinez, M., Gerrodette, T., Barlow, J., and Hrovat, Y.N., Lessons from 
monitoring trends in abundance of marine mammals, Marine Mammal Science 23:157-175 
(2007). 

DATA 30 NMFS should review the references below regarding climate change and polar bears: 

Durner, G. M., et al., Predicting 21st-century polar bear habitat distribution from global 
climate models. Ecological Monographs, 79(1):25-58 (2009). 

R. F. Rockwell, L. J. Gormezano, The early bear gets the goose: climate change, polar bears 
and lesser snow geese in western Hudson Bay, Polar Biology, 32:539-547 (2009). 

DATA 31 NMFS should review the references below regarding climate change and the impacts of black 
carbon: 

Anne E. Gore & Pamela A. Miller, Broken Promises: The Reality of Oil Development in 
America’s Arctic at 41 (Sep. 2009) (Broken Promises). 

EPA, Report to Congress on Black Carbon External Peer Review Draft at 12-1 (March 2011) 
(Black Carbon Report), available at 
http://yosemite.epa.gov/sab/sabproduct.nsf/0/05011472499C2FB28525774A0074DADE/$Fil
e/BC%20RTC%20Ext ernal%20Peer%20Review%20Draft-opt.pdf. See D. Hirdman et al., 
Source Identification of Short-Lived Air Pollutants in the Arctic Using Statistical Analysis of 
Measurement Data and Particle Dispersion Model Output, 10 Atmos. Chem. Phys. 669 
(2010). 

DATA 32 NMFS should review the references below regarding air pollution: 

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region 10, Supplemental Statement of Basis for 
Proposed OCS Prevention of Significant Deterioration Permits Noble Discoverer Drillship, 
Shell Offshore Inc., Beaufort Sea Exploration Drilling Program, Permit No. R10OCS/PSD-
AK-2010-01, Shell Gulf of Mexico Inc., Chukchi Sea Exploration Drilling Program, Permit 
No. R10OCS/PSD-AK-09-01 at 65 (July 6, 2011) (Discoverer Suppl. Statement of Basis 
2011), available at http://www.epa.gov/region10/pdf/permits/shell/discoverer_supplemental_ 
statement_of_basis_chukchi_and_beaufort_air_permits_070111.pdf. 393 EPA Region 10, 
Technical Support Document, Review of Shell’s Supplemental Ambient Air Quality Impact 
Analysis for the Discoverer OCS Permit Applications in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas at 8 
(Jun. 24, 2011)(Discoverer Technical Support Document), available at 
http://www.epa.gov/region10/pdf/permits/shell/discoverer_ambient_air_quality_impact_anal
ysis_06242011.pdf. 394 EPA, An Introduction to Indoor Air Quality: Nitrogen Dioxide, 
available at http://www.epa.gov/iaq/no2.html#Health Effects Associated with Nitrogen 
Dioxide 396 EPA, Particulate Matter: Health, available at 
http://www.epa.gov/oar/particlepollution/health.html 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 37 
Comment Analysis Report 

DATA 33 NMFS should review the references below regarding introduction of non-native species: 

S. Gollasch, The importance of ship hull fouling as a vector of species introductions into the 
North Sea, Biofouling 18(2):105-121 (2002); National Research Council, Stemming the Tide: 
Controlling Introductions of Nonindigenous Species by Ships Ballast Water (1996) 
(recognizing that the spread of invasive species through ballast water is a serious problem). 

DATA 34 In the Final EIS, NMFS should consider new information regarding the EPA Region 10's 
Beaufort (AKG-28-2100) and Chukchi (AKG-28-8100) General Permits. Although not final, 
EPA is in the process of soliciting public comment on the fact sheets and draft permits and 
this information may be useful depending on the timing of the issuance of the final EIS. Links 
to the fact sheets, draft permits, and other related documents can be found at: 
http://yosemite.epa.gov/r I 0/water.nsl/nodes+public+notices/arctic-gp-pn-2012. 

DATA 35 NMFS should review the reference below regarding characterization of subsistence 
areas/activities for Kotzebue: 

Whiting, A., D. Griffith, S. Jewett, L. Clough, W. Ambrose, and J. Johnson. 2011. 
Combining Inupiaq and Scientific Knowledge: Ecology in Northern Kotzebue Sound, Alaska. 
Alaska Sea Grant, University of Alaska Fairbanks, SG-ED-72, Fairbanks. 71 pp, for a more 
accurate representation, especially for Kotzebue Sound uses. 

Crawford, J. A., K. J. Frost, L. T. Quakenbush, and A. Whiting. 201.2. Different habitat use 
strategies by subadult and adult ringed seals (Phoca hispida} in the Bering and Chukchi seas. 
Polar Biology 35{2):241-255. 

DATA 36 NMFS should review the references below regarding Ecosystem-Based Management: 

Environmental Law Institute. Intergrated Ecosystem-Based Management of the US. Arctic 
Marine Environment- Assessing the Feasibility of Program and Development and 
Implementation (2008) 

Siron, Robert et al. Ecosystem-Based Management in the Arctic Ocean: A Multi¬ Level 
Spatial Approach, Arctic Vol. 61, Suppl 1 (2008) (pp 86-102)2 

Norwegian Polar Institute. Best Practices in Ecosystem-based Oceans Management in the 
Arctic, Report Series No. 129 (2009) 

The Aspen Institute Energy and Environment Program. The Shared Future: A Report of the 
Aspen Institute Commission on Arctic Climate Change (2011) 

DATA 37 NMFS should consider the following information regarding the use of a multi-pulse standard 
for behavioral harassment, since it does not take into account the spreading of seismic pulses 
over time beyond a certain distance from the array. NMFS‘ own Open Water Panel for the 
Arctic has twice characterized the seismic airgun array as a mixed impulsive/continuous 
noise source and has stated that NMFS should evaluate its impacts on that basis. That 
analysis is supported by the masking effects model referenced above, in which several NMFS 
scientists have participated; by a Scripps study, showing that seismic exploration in the Arctic 
has raised ambient noise levels on the Chukchi Sea continental slope (see infra); and, we 
expect, by the modeling efforts of NOAA Sound Mapping working group, whose work will 
be completed this April or May. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 38 
Comment Analysis Report 

DATA 38 NMFS is asked to review the use of the reference Richardson 1995, on page 4-86, as support 
for its statements. NMFS should revise the document to account for Southall et al's 2007 
paper on Effects of Noise on Marine Mammals. 

DATA 39 The Final EIS should include updated data sources including: 

• Preliminary results from the Kotzebue Air Toxics Monitoring Study which should be 
available from the DEC shortly. 

• Data collected from the Red Dog Mine lead monitoring program in Noatak and Kivalina. 

DATA 40 Page 4-21, paragraph three should reference the recently issued Ocean Discharge Criteria 
Evaluation (ODCE) that accompanies the draft Beaufort Sea and Chukchi Sea NPDES 
General Permits, which has more recent dispersal modeling. They should also be referenced 
in the Final EIS to clarify the “increased concentration” language used on page 4-56. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 39 
Comment Analysis Report 

Discharge (DCH) 
DCH Comments regarding discharge levels, including requests for zero discharge requirements, 

and deep waste injection wells. Does not include contamination of subsistence resources. 

DCH 1 It is not clear how NMFS and BOEM can address the persistence of pollutants, 
bioaccumulation, and vulnerability of biological communities without the benefit of EPA 
evaluation. The proposed zero discharge mandate described in the Arctic DEIS may be 
lacking EPA's critical input on the matter, possibly contradicting EPA's direction based on the 
pending ODCE evaluation. 

DCH 2 The DEIS should not use the term “zero discharge” as there will be some discharges under 
any exploration scenario. The use of this term can be confusing to the public. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 40 
Comment Analysis Report 

Editorial (EDI) 
EDI Comments associated with specific text edits to the document. 

EDI 1 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into the Executive Summary. 

EDI 2 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 1. 

EDI 3 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 2. 

EDI 4 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 3 – Physical 
Environment. 

EDI 5 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 3 – Biological 
Environment. 

EDI 6 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 3 – Social 
Environment. 

EDI 7 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 4 – Methodology. 

EDI 8 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 4 – Physical 
Environment. 

EDI 9 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 4 – Biological 
Environment. 

EDI 10 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 4 – Social 
Environment. 

EDI 11 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 4 – Oil Spill Analysis. 

EDI 12 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 4 – Cumulative Effects 
Analysis. 

EDI 13 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Chapter 5 – Mitigation. 

EDI 14 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into the figures in the EIS. 

EDI 15 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into the tables in the EIS. 

EDI 16 NMFS should consider incorporating the following edits into Appendix A of the EIS. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 41 
Comment Analysis Report 

Physical Environment – General (GPE) 
GPE Comments related to impacts on resources within the physical environment (Physical 

Oceanography, Climate, Acoustics, and Environmental Contaminants & Ecosystem 
Functions ) 

GPE 1 The EIS should include an analysis of impacts associated with climate change and ocean 
acidification including: 

• Addressing threats to species and associated impacts for the bowhead whale, pacific 
walrus, and other Arctic species. 

• Effects of loss of sea ice cover, seasonally ice-free conditions on the availability of 
subsistence resources to Arctic communities. 

• Increased community stress, including loss of subsistence resources and impacts to ice 
cellars. 

GPE 2 Oil and gas activities can release numerous pollutants into the atmosphere. Greater emissions 
of nitrogen oxides and carbon monoxide could triple ozone levels in the Arctic, and increased 
black carbon emissions would result in reduced ice reflectivity that could exacerbate the 
decline of sea ice. The emission of fine particulate matter (PM 2.5), including black carbon, is 
a human health threat. Cumulative impacts will need to be assessed. 

GPE 3 A more detailed analysis should be conducted to assess how interactions between high ice 
and low ice years and oil and gas activities, would impact various resources (sea ice, lower 
trophic levels, fish/EFH, or marine mammals). 

GPE 4 Recommendations should be made to industry engineering and risk analysts to ensure that 
well design is deep enough to withstand storms and harsh environment based on past 
experience of workers. 

GPE 5 The NMFS needs to revise the Environmental Consequences analysis presented in the DEIS 
since it overstates the potential for impacts from sounds introduced into the water by oil and 
gas exploration activity on marine mammals. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 42 
Comment Analysis Report 

Social Environment – General (GSE) 
GSE Comments related to impacts on resources within the social environment (Public Health, 

Cultural, Land Ownership/Use/Management, Transportation, Recreation and Tourism, Visual 
Resources, and Environmental Justice) 

GSE 1 The potential short- and long-term benefits from oil and gas development have been 
understated in the DEIS and do not take into account the indirect jobs and business generated 
by increased oil and gas activity. By removing restrictions on seismic surveys and oil and gas 
drilling, there will be an increase in short- and long-term employment and economic stability. 

GSE 2 The current environmental justice analysis is inadequate, and NMFS has downplayed the 
overall threat to the Iñupiat people. The agency does not adequately address the following: 

• The combined impacts of air pollution, water pollution, sociocultural impacts 
(disturbance of subsistence practices), and economic impacts on Iñupiat people; 

• The baseline health conditions of local communities and how it may be impacted by the 
proposed oil and gas activities; 

• Potential exposure to toxic chemicals and diminished air quality; 
• The unequal burden and risks imposed on Iñupiat communities; and 
• The analysis fails to include all Iñupiat communities. 

GSE 3 Current and up to date health information should be evaluated and presented in the human 
health assessments. Affected communities have a predisposition and high susceptibility to 
health problems that need to be evaluated and considered when NMFS develops alternatives 
and mitigation measures to address impacts. 

GSE 4 When developing alternatives and mitigation measures, NMFS needs to consider the length 
of the work season since a shorter period will increase the risks to workers. 

GSE 5 The DEIS does not address how the proceeds from offshore oil and gas drilling will be shared 
with affected communities through revenue sharing, royalties, and taxes. 

GSE 6 The DEIS should broaden the evaluation of impacts of land and water resources beyond 
subsistence. There are many diverse water and land uses that will be restricted or prevented 
because of specific requirements in the proposed alternatives. 

GSE 7 The conclusion of negligible or minor cumulative impacts on transportation for Alternative 4 
was not substantiated in the DEIS. The impacts to access, restrictions on vessel traffic, 
seismic survey, exploration drilling and ancillary services transportation are severely 
restricted both in time and in areal/geographic extent. (page 4-551, paragraph 1). 

GSE 8 The Draft EIS should not assume that any delay in exploration activity compromises property 
rights or immediately triggers compensation from the government. Offshore leases do not 
convey a fee simple interest with a guarantee that exploration activities will take place. As the 
Supreme Court recognized, OCSLA‘s plain language indicates that the purchase of a lease 
entails no right to proceed with full exploration, development, or production. 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 43 
Comment Analysis Report 

Habitat (HAB) 
HAB Comments associated with habitat requirements, or potential habitat impacts from seismic 

activities and exploratory drilling. Comment focus is habitat, not animals. 

HAB 1 NMFS should consider an ecosystem-based management plan to protect habitat for the 
bowhead whale and other important wildlife subsistence species of the Arctic. 

HAB 2 The DEIS should include a rigorous and comprehensive analysis of the increased risk of 
introducing aquatic invasive species to the Beaufort and Chukchi seas through increased oil 
and gas activities. NMFS should consider: 

• Invasive species could be released in ballast water, carried on ship's hulls, or on drill rigs. 
• Invasive species could compete with or prey on Arctic marine fish or shellfish species, 

which may disrupt the ecosystem and predators that depend on indigenous species for 
food. 

• Invasive species could impact the biological structure of bottom habitat or change habitat 
diversity. 

• Invasive species, such as rats, could prey upon seabirds or their eggs. 
• Establishment of a harmful invasive species could threaten Alaska’s economic well-

being. 
• The analysis of impacts resulting from the introduction of invasive species is ambiguous 

as to how the resulting impact conclusion would be “moderate” instead of “major.” The 
EIS should be revised to reflect these concerns. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 44 
Comment Analysis Report 

Iñupiat Culture and Way of Life (ICL) 
ICL Comments related to potential cultural impacts or desire to maintain traditional practices 

(PEOPLE). 

ICL 1 Industrial activities (such as oil and gas exploration and production) jeopardize the long-term 
health and culture of native communities. Specific concerns include: 

• Impacts to Arctic ecosystems and the associated subsistence resources from pollutants, 
noise, and vessel traffic; 

• Community and family level cultural impacts related to the subsistence way of life; 
• Preserving resources for future generations. 

ICL 2 Native communities would be heavily impacted if a spill occurs, depriving them of 
subsistence resources. NMFS should consider the impact of an oil spill when deciding upon 
an alternative. 

ICL 3 Native communities are at risk for changes from multiple threats, including climate change, 
increased industrialization, access to the North Slope, melting ice, and stressed wildlife. 
These threats are affecting Inupiat traditional and cultural uses and NMFS should stop 
authorizing offshore oil and gas related activities until these threats to Iñupiat culture are 
addressed. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 45 
Comment Analysis Report 

Mitigation Measures (MIT) 
MIT Comments related to suggestions for or implementation of mitigation measures. 

MIT 1 Mitigation measures should be mandatory for all activities, rather than on a case-by-case 
basis. Currently identified areas with high wildlife and subsistence values should also receive 
permanent deferrals, including Camden Bay, Barrow Canyon/Western Beaufort Sea, Hanna 
Shoal, shelf break at the Beaufort Sea, and Kasegaluk Lagoon/Ledyard Bay Critical Habitat 
Unit. 

MIT 2 The proposed mitigation measures will severely compromise the economic feasibility of 
developing oil and gas in the Alaska OCS: 

• Limiting activity to only two exploration drilling programs in each the Chukchi and 
Beaufort seas during a single season would lock out other lease holders and prevent them 
from pursuing development of their leases. 

• Arbitrary end dates for prospective operations effectively restrict exploration in Camden 
Bay by removing 54 percent of the drilling season. 

• Acoustic restrictions extend exclusion zones and curtail lease block access (e.g., studies 
by JASCO Applied Sciences Ltd in 2010 showed a 120 dB safety zone with Hanna Shoal 
as the center would prevent Statoil from exercising its lease rights because the buffer 
zone would encompass virtually all of the leases. A 180 dB buffer zone could still have a 
significant negative impact on lease rights depending on how the buffer zone was 
calculated). 

• Special Habitat Areas arbitrarily restrict lease block access. 
• Arbitrary seasonal closures would effectively reduce the brief open water season by up to 

50 percent in some areas of the Chukchi and Beaufort seas. 
• The realistic drilling window for offshore operations in the Arctic is typically 70 - 150 

days. Any infringement on this could result in insufficient time to complete drilling 
operations. 

• Timing restrictions associated with Additional Mitigation Measures (e.g., D1, B1) would 
significantly reduce the operational season. 

MIT 3 Many mitigation measures are unclear or left open to agency interpretation, expanding 
uncertainties for future exploration or development. 

MIT 4 The DEIS includes mitigation measures which would mandate portions of CAAs with broad 
impacts to operations. Such a requirement supersedes the authority of NMFS. 

MIT 5 Limiting access to our natural resources is not an appropriate measure and should not be 
considered. 

MIT 6 A specially equipped, oceangoing platform(s) is needed to carry out the prevention, 
diagnosis, and treatment of disease in marine animals, including advanced action to promote 
population recovery of threatened and endangered species, to restore marine ecosystems 
health, and to enhance marine animal welfare. Activities could include: 

• Response to marine environmental disasters and incidents; in particular oil spills by 
rescue and decontamination of oil-fouled birds, pinnipeds, otters, and other sea life. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 46 
Comment Analysis Report 

• Rescue, treatment and freeing of sea turtles, pinnipeds, cetaceans, and otters that become 
entangled in sport fishing lines, commercial fishing gear, and/or marine debris. 

• General pathobiological research on marine animals to advance basic knowledge of their 
diseases and to identify promising avenues for treatment. Specialized pathobiological 
research on those marine animals known to provide useful sentinels for toxicological and 
other hazards to human health. 

• Evaluation of the safety of treatment modalities for marine animals, including in 
particular large balaenopterids. This will have as its ultimate aim countering problems of 
climate change and ecosystems deterioration by therapeutic enhancement of the 
ecosystems services contributed by now depleted populations of Earth’s largest and most 
powerful mammals. 

• Pending demonstration of safety, offshore deployment of fast boats and expert personnel 
for the treatment of a known endemic parasitic disease threatening the health and 
population recovery of certain large balaenopterids. 

• Rapid transfer by helicopter of technical experts in disentanglement of large whales to 
offshore sites not immediately accessible from land-based facilities. Rapid transfer by 
helicopter of diseased and injured marine animals to land-based veterinary hospitals. 

• Coordination with U.S. Coast Guard’s OCEAN STEWARD mission to reduce the burden 
on government in this area and to implement more fully the policy of the United States 
promulgated by Executive Order 13547. 

MIT 7 Considering current and ongoing oil and gas exploration disasters, how can the public be 
assured of the safety and effectiveness of Arctic environmental safety and mitigation 
strategies? 

MIT 8 Mitigation distances and thresholds for seismic surveys are inadequate as they fall far short of 
where significant marine mammal disturbances are known to occur. More stringent 
mitigation measures are needed to keep oil and gas activities in the Arctic from having more 
than a negligible impact. 

MIT 9 There is no need for additional mitigation measures: 

• The DEIS seeks to impose mitigation measures on activities that are already proven to be 
adequately mitigated and shown to pose little to no risk to either individual animals or 
populations. 

• Many of these mitigation measures are of questionable effectiveness and/or benefit, some 
are simply not feasible, virtually all fall outside the bounds of any reasonable cost-benefit 
consideration, most are inadequately evaluated. 

• The additional mitigation measures are too restrictive and could result in serving as the 
No Action alternative. 

• These additional mitigation measures far exceed the scope of NMFS' authority. 

MIT 10 The EIS should reflect that Active Acoustic Monitoring should be further studied, but it is not 
yet ready to be imposed as a mitigation measure. 

MIT 11 Because NMFS is already requiring Passive Acoustic Monitoring (PAM) as a monitoring or 
mitigation requirement during the NMFS’ regulation of offshore seismic and sonar, and in 
conjunction with Navy sonar, we recommend that the NMFS emphasize the availability and 
encourage the use of PAMGUARD in all NMFS’ actions requiring or recommending the use 
of PAM. PAMGUARD is an open source, highly tested, and well documented version of 
PAM that is an acceptable method of meeting any PAM requirements or recommendations. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 47 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 12 If Kotzebue is included in the EIS area because it is an eligible area for exploration activities, 
then the DEIS needs to include recommendations for mitigating impacts through exclusion 
areas, or timing issues, including: 

• Remove the Hope Basin from the EIS area; and 
• Develop and include additional area/time closures/restrictions for nearshore Kotzebue 

Sound and for Point Hope and Kivalina in the Final EIS. 

MIT 13 There should be no on-ice discharge of drilling muds due to the concentrated nature of waste 
and some likely probability of directly contacting marine mammals or other wildlife like 
arctic foxes and birds. Even if the muds are considered non-toxic, the potential for fouling fur 
and feathers and impeding thermal regulation properties seems a reasonable concern. 

MIT 14 There should be communication centers in the villages during bowhead and beluga hunting if 
subsistence hunters find this useful and desirable. 

MIT 15 The benefits of concurrent ensonification areas need to be given more consideration in 
regards to 15 mile vs. 90 mile separation distances. It is not entirely clear what the 
cost/benefit result is on this issue, including: 

• Multiple simultaneous surveys in several areas across the migratory corridor could result 
in a broader regional biological and subsistence impact -deflection could occur across a 
large area of feeding habitat. 

• Potential benefit would depend on the trajectory of migrating animals in relation to the 
activity and total area ensonified. 

• Consideration needs to be given to whether mitigation is more effective if operations are 
grouped together or spread across a large area. 

MIT 16 Use mitigation measures that are practicable and produce real world improvement on the 
level and amount of negative impacts. Do not use those that theoretically sound good or look 
good or feel good, but that actually result in an improved situation. Encourage trials of new 
avoidance mechanisms. 

MIT 17 Trained dogs are the most effective means of finding ringed seal dens and breathing holes in 
Kotzebue Sound so should be used to clear path for on-ice roads or other on-ice activities. 

MIT 18 The potential increased risk associated with the timing that vessels can enter exploration areas 
needs to be considered: 

• A delayed start could increase the risk of losing control of a VLOS that will more likely 
occur at the end of the season when environmental conditions (ice and freezing 
temperatures) rapidly become more challenging and hazardous. 

• Operators could stage at leasing areas but hold off on exploration activity until July l5 or 
until Point Lay beluga hunt is completed. 

MIT 19 The proposed time/area closures are insufficient to protect areas of ecological and cultural 
significance. Alternatives in the final EIS that consider any level of industrial activity should 
include permanent subsistence and ecological deferral areas in addition to time and place 
restrictions, including: 

• Hanna and Herald shoals, Barrow Canyon, and the Chukchi Sea ice lead system 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 48 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 20 The DEIS should definitively establish the full suite of mandatory mitigation measures for 
each alternative that will be required for any given site-specific activity, instead of listing a 
series of mitigation measures that may or may not apply to site-specific actions. 

• NMFS should ensure that mitigation measures are in place prior to starting any activity 
rather than considering mitigation measures on a case by case basis later in the process 
when it is more difficult as activities have advanced in planning. 

• Make additional mitigation measures standard and include both for any level of activity 
that includes, at a minimum, those activities described in Section 2.4.9 and 2.4.10 of the 
DEIS. 

• Mitigation measures required previously by IHAs (e.g., a 160dB vessel monitoring zone 
for whales during shallow hazard surveys) show it is feasible for operators to perform 
these measures. 

• NMFS should require a full suite of standard mitigation measures for every take 
authorization issued by the agency and they should also be included under the terms and 
conditions for the BOEM’s issuance of geological and geophysical permits and ancillary 
activity and exploratory drilling approvals. 

• A number of detection-based measures should be standardized (e.g., sound source 
verification, PAM). 

• Routing vessels around important habitat should be standard. 

MIT 21 NMFS could mitigate the risk ice poses by including seasonal operating restrictions in the 
Final EIS and preferred alternative. 

MIT 22 The identified time/area closures (Alternative 4 and Additional Mitigation Measure B1) are 
unwarranted, arbitrary measures in search of an adverse impact that does not exist. These 
closures would severely negatively impact seismic and exploration program activities: 

• The DEIS does not identify any data or other scientific information establishing that past, 
present, or reasonably anticipated oil and gas activity in these areas has had, or is likely to 
have, either more than a negligible impact on marine mammals or any unmitigable 
adverse impact on the availability of marine mammals for subsistence activities. 

• There is no information about what levels of oil and gas activity are foreseeably expected 
to occur in the identified areas in the absence of time/area closures, or what the 
anticipated adverse impacts from such activities would be. Without this information, the 
time/area closure mitigation measures are arbitrary because there is an insufficient basis 
to evaluate and compare the effects with and without time/area closures except through 
speculation. 

• The time/area closures are for mitigation of an anticipated large number of 2D/3D 
seismic surveys, but few 2D/3D seismic surveys are anticipated in the next five years. 
There is no scientific evidence that these seismic surveys, individually or collectively, 
resulted in more than a negligible impact. 

• The designation of geographic boundaries by NMFS and BOEM should be removed, and 
projects should be evaluated based upon specific project requirements, as there is not 
sufficient evidence presented that supports that arbitrary area boundary determinations 
will provide protection to marine mammal species. 

• There is a lack of scientific evidence around actual importance level and definition of 
these closure areas. The descriptions of these areas do not meet the required standard of 
using the best available science. 

• With no significant purpose, they should be removed from consideration. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 49 
Comment Analysis Report 

• If the closures intended to reduce disturbances of migrating, feeding, and resting whales 
are not reducing the level of impact they should not be considered effective mitigation 
measures. 

• Placing the time closures chronologically in sequence, results in closures from mid-July 
through at least mid-September, and in some cases through mid-October. This leaves less 
than half of the non-ice season available for activity in those areas, with no resulting 
resource and species protection realized. 

• The arbitrary limits to the duration of programs will cause high intensity, short and long 
term adverse effects and restrictions to oil and gas land and water uses. 

MIT 23 The time/area closure for Camden Bay (Alternative 4 and Additional Mitigation Measure B1) 
is both arbitrary and impracticable because there is no demonstrated need. It needs to be 
clarified, modified, or removed: 

• BOEM’s analysis of Shell’s exploration drilling program in Camden Bay found 
anticipated impacts to marine mammals and subsistence are minimal and fully mitigated. 

• The proposed September 1 to October 15 closure effectively eliminates over 54 percent 
of the open water exploration drilling season in Camden Bay and would likely render 
exploration drilling in Camden Bay economically and logistically impracticable, thereby 
effectively imposing a full closure of the area under the guise of mitigation. 

• The conclusion that Camden Bay is of particular importance to bowhead whales is not 
supported by the available data (e.g., Huntington and Quakenbush 2009, Koski and 
Miller 2009, and Quakenbush et al. 2010). Occasional feeding in the area and sightings of 
some cow/calf pairs in some years does not make it a uniquely important area. 

• Occasional feeding by bowhead whales is insufficient justification for a Special Habitat 
Area designation for Camden Bay. Under this reasoning, the entire length of the Alaska 
Beaufort Sea coast would also have to be designed. 

• A standard mitigation measure already precludes all activities until the close of the 
Kaktovik and Nuiqsut fall bowhead hunts. Furthermore, in the last 10 years no bowhead 
whales have been taken after the third week of September in either the Nuiqsut or 
Kaktovik hunts so proposing closure to extend well into October is unjustified. 

• This Additional Mitigation Measure (B-1) should be deleted for the reasons outlined 
above. If not, then start and end dates of the closure period must be clarified; hard dates 
should be provided for the start and end of the closure or the closure should be tied to 
actual hunts. 

• How boundaries and timing were determined needs to be described. 

MIT 24 Restrictions intended to prevent sound levels above 120 dB or 160 dB are arbitrary, 
unwarranted, and impractical. 

• Restrictions at the 120 dB level, are impracticable to monitor because the resulting 
exclusion zones are enormous, and the Arctic Ocean is an extremely remote area that 
experiences frequent poor weather. 

• The best scientific evidence does not support a need for imposition of restrictions at 120 
dB or 160 dB levels. One of the most compelling demonstrations of this point comes 
from the sustained period of robust growth and recovery experienced by the Western 
Arctic stock of bowhead whales, while exposed to decades of seismic surveys and other 
activities without restrictions at the 120 dB or 160 dB levels. 

MIT 25 The DEIS should not limit the maximum number of programs per year. Implementing 
multiple programs per year is the preferred option for the Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5, as there 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 50 
Comment Analysis Report 

is not just cause in the DEIS to validate that acoustic and non-acoustic impacts from these 
programs are severe enough to cause long-term acute or cumulative negative impacts or 
adverse modifications to marine mammals throughout the planning area. The appropriate 
mitigations can be determined and implemented for each program at the time of ITA and 
G&G permit approvals. 

MIT 26 Additional Mitigation Measure C2 should be discussed in more detail, clarified, or deleted in 
the final EIS: 

• Shipping routes or shipping lanes of this sort are established and enforced under the 
regulatory authority of the U.S. Coast Guard. While NOAA or BOEM could establish 
restricted areas, they could not regulate shipping routes. 

• With this mitigation measure in place, successful exploration cannot be conducted in the 
Chukchi Sea. 

• Not only would lease holders be unable to conduct seismic and shallow hazard surveys 
on some leases, but essential geophysical surveys for pipelines to shore, such as ice 
gouge surveys, strudel scour surveys, and bathymetric surveys could not be conducted. 

MIT 27 There is no scientific justification for Additional Mitigation Measure C3 (ensuring reduced, 
limited, or zero discharge). NMFS needs to explain in the final EIS how NOAA's 
recommendations can justify being more stringent than EPA's permit conditions, limitations, 
and requirements. There are no scientific reports that indicate any of these discharges have 
any effect on marine mammals and anything beyond a negligible effect on habitat. 

MIT 28 The purpose, intent, and description of Additional Mitigation Measure C4 need to be clarified 
(see page 4-67). In Section 2.5.4 of the DEIS it was stated that NPDES permitting effectively 
regulates/handles discharges from operations. Zero discharge was removed from further 
analysis. The Additional Mitigation Measure focusing on zero discharge should also be 
removed. 

MIT 29 Additional Mitigation Measure D1 needs to be clarified as to what areas will be 
impacted/closed and justified and/or modified accordingly: 

• It is not clear if this restriction is focused on the nearshore Chukchi Sea or on all areas. 
• The logic of restrictions on vessels due to whales avoiding those areas may justify 

restrictions in the nearshore areas, but it is not clear how this logic would justify closing 
the entire Chukchi offshore areas to vessel traffic if open water exists. 

• If a more specific exclusion area (e.g., within 30 miles of the coast) would be protective 
of beluga whale migration routes, it should be considered instead of closing the Chukchi 
Sea to transiting vessels. 

• It is not scientifically supported to close the entire Chukchi Sea to vessel traffic when the 
stated intent is to avoid disrupting the subsistence hunt of beluga whales during their 
migration along or near the coast near Point Lay. 

• Transits should be allowed provided that they do not interfere with the hunt. 
• Transits far offshore should be allowed, and transits that are done within the conditions 

established through a CAA should be allowed. 
• Prohibiting movement of drilling vessels and equipment outside of the barrier islands 

would unreasonably limit the entire drilling season to less than two months. 
• Movement of drilling vessels and related equipment in a manner that avoids impacts to 

subsistence users should be allowed on a case-by-case basis and as determined through 
mechanisms such as the CAA not through inflexible DEIS mitigation requirements. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 51 
Comment Analysis Report 

• BOEM (2011b) has previously concluded that oil and gas activities in the Chukchi Sea 
would not overlap in space with Point Lay beluga hunting activities, and therefore would 
have no effect on Point Lay beluga subsistence resources. Given that the entire Lease 
Sale 193 area does not overlap geographically with Point Lay subsistence activities, it is 
reasonable to draw the same conclusion for activities of other lease holders in the 
Chukchi Sea as well. 

• This measure also prohibits all geophysical activity within 60 mi of the Chukchi 
coastline. No reason is offered. The mitigation measure would prohibit lease holders from 
conducting shallow hazards surveys and other geophysical surveys on and between 
leases. Such surveys are needed for design and engineering. 

MIT 30 The time/area closure of Hanna Shoal is difficult to assess and to justify and should be 
removed from Alternative 4 and Additional Mitigation Measure B1: 

• There needs to be information as to how and why the boundaries of the Hanna Shoal 
were drawn; it is otherwise not possible to meaningfully comment on whether the 
protection itself is justified and whether it should be further protected by a buffer zone. 

• The closure cannot be justified on the basis of mitigating potential impacts to subsistence 
hunters during the fall bowhead whale hunt as the DEIS acknowledges that the actual 
hunting grounds are well inshore of Hanna Shoal, and there is no evidence that industry 
activities in that area could impact the hunts. 

• Current science does not support closure of the area for protection of the walrus. 
• Closure of the area for gray whales on an annual basis is not supported, as recent aerial 

survey data suggests that it has not been used by gray whales in recent years, and the 
historic data do not suggest that it was important for gray whales on a routine (annual) 
basis. 

• The October 15 end date for the closure is too late in the season to be responsive to 
concerns regarding walrus and gray whales. As indicated in the description in the DEIS 
of the measure by NMFS and USGS walrus tracking data, the area is used little after 
August. Similarly, few gray whales are found in the area after September. 

MIT 31 Plans of Cooperation (POCs) and CAAs are effective tools to ensure that meaningful 
consultations continue to take place. NMFS should ensure that POCs and CAAs continue to 
be available to facilitate interaction between the oil and gas industry and local communities. 
NMFS should be explicit in how the CAA process is integrated into the process of reviewing 
site specific industry proposals and should require offshore operators to enter into a CAA 
with AEWC for the following reasons: 

• Affected communities depend on the CAA process to provide a voice in management of 
offshore activities. 

• Through the CAA process, whaling captains use their traditional knowledge to determine 
whether and how oil and gas activities can be conducted consistent with our subsistence 
activities. 

• Promotes a community-based, collaborative model for making decisions, which is much 
more likely to result in consensus and reduce conflict. 

• Promotes the objectives of OCSLA, which provides for the "expeditious and orderly 
development [of the OCS], subject to environmental safeguards ...” 

• Serves the objectives of the MMPA, which states that the primary objective of 
management of marine mammals "should be to maintain the health and stability of the 
marine ecosystem. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 52 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 32 The number of mitigation measures that are necessary or appropriate should be analyzed 
case-by-case in the context of issuing ITA/IHA/permit/approval, the nature and extent of the 
risk or effect they are mitigating, and cost and effectiveness. The scope of necessary 
measures should be dictated by specific activity for which approval or a permit is being 
sought. 

MIT 33 NMFS cannot reasonably mandate use of the technologies to be used under Alternative 5, 
since they are not commercially available, not fully tested, unproven and should not be 
considered reasonably foreseeable. 

MIT 34 For open water and in-ice marine surveys, include the standard mitigation measure of a 
mitigation airgun during turns between survey lines and during nighttime activities. 

MIT 35 Include shutdown of activities in specific areas corresponding to start and conclusion of 
bowhead whale hunts for all communities that hunt bowhead whales, not just Nuiqsut (Cross 
Island) and Kaktovik (as stated on p. 2-41). 

MIT 36 Evaluate the necessity of including dates within the DEIS. Communication with members of 
village Whaling Captains Associations indicate that the dates of hunts may shift due to 
changing weather patterns, resulting in a shift in blackout dates. 

MIT 37 Additional Mitigation Measure B3 should not be established, particularly at these distances, 
because it is both unwarranted from an environmental protection perspective and unnecessary 
given how seismic companies already have an incentive for separation. It should also not be 
considered as an EIS project area-wide measure. 

• The basis for the distances is premised on use of sound exposure levels that are indicative 
of harm. Use of the 160 dB standard would establish a propagation distance of 9-13 
kilometers. The distance in the mitigation measure therefore seems excessive and no 
scientific basis was provided. 

• NMFS has justified the 120 dB threshold based on concerns of continuous noise sources, 
not impulsive sound sources such as seismic surveys. 

• The argument that overlapping sound fields could mask cetacean communication has 
already been judged to be a minor concern. NMFS has noted, "in general, NMFS expects 
the masking effects of seismic pulses to be minor, given the normally intermittent nature 
of seismic pulses." (76 Fed. Reg. at 6438, February 4, 2011). 

• The mitigation measure is prohibitively restrictive, and it is unclear what, if any, 
mitigation of impacts this measure would result. 

• NMFS should only impose limitations of the proximity of seismic surveys to each other 
(or to specific habitat areas) when and where they are applicable to known locations 
where biologically significant impacts might occur. There is no evidence that such 
important feeding areas occur within the EIS area other than just east of Point Barrow. 

• It should only be used at specific times and locations and after a full evaluation of the 
likelihood of overlap of seismic sound and/or disturbance impacts has actually taken 
place. Simply assuming that seismic sound might overlap and be additive in nature is 
incorrect. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 53 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 38 Additional Mitigation Measure A5 provisions are unclear, unjustified, and impractical: 

• The justification for believing that biologically significant effects to individuals or the 
bowhead population would occur from exposure of four or more bowhead cow/calf pairs 
to >120 dB pulsed sounds is not provided or referenced. 

• The amount of time and effort required to monitoring for four or more bowhead cow/calf 
pairs within the 120 dB seismic sound level area take away from better defining the 
distances and/or sound level thresholds at which more substantial impacts may be 
occurring 

• Would the referenced 4 or more cow/calf pairs have to be actually observed within the 
area to trigger mitigation actions or would mitigation be required if survey data corrected 
for sightability biases using standard line-transect protocols suggested 4 or more were 
present? 

• If a mitigation measure for aggregations of 12 or more whales were to be included there 
needs to be scientific justification for the number of animals required to trigger the 
mitigation action. 

MIT 39 Additional Mitigation Measure C1 needs to be more clearly defined (or deleted), as it is 
redundant and nearly impossible and impractical for industry to implement. 

• Steering around a loosely aggregated group of animals is nearly impossible as PSOs often 
do not notice such a group until a number of sightings have occurred and the vessel is 
already within the higher density patch. At that point it likely does more harm than good 
trying to steer away from each individual or small group of animals as it will only take 
the vessel towards another individual or small group. 

• This measure contains requirements that are already requirements, such as Standard 
Mitigation Measures B1 and D3, such as a minimum altitude of 457 m. 

• The mitigation measure requires the operator to adhere to USFWS mitigation measures. 
Why is a measure needed to have operators follow another agency’s mitigation measures 
which already would have the force of law. 

• The measure states that there is a buffer zone around polar bear sea ice critical habitat 
which is false. 

MIT 40 NMFS’ conclusion that implementation of time closures does not reduce the spatial 
distribution of sound levels is not entirely correct (Page 4- 283 Section 4.7.1.4.2). The 
closures of Hanna Shoal would effectively eliminate any industrial activities in or near the 
area, thereby reducing the spatial distribution of industrial activities and associated sound. 

MIT 41 The time/area closure for the Beaufort Sea shelf needs to be justified by more than 
speculation of feeding there by belugas. 

• There is no evidence cited in the EIS stating that the whales are feeding there at that time 
and that it is an especially important location 

• Most belugas sighted along the shelf break during aerial surveys are observed traveling or 
migrating, not feeding. 

• Placing restrictions on the shelf break area of the Beaufort Sea is arbitrary especially 
when beluga whale impact analyses generally find only low level impacts under current 
standard mitigation measures. 

MIT 42 Quiet buffer areas should be established to protect areas of biological and ecological 
significance, such as Hanna Shoal and Barrow Canyon. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 54 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 43 Quieter alternative technologies should be required in areas newly opened to oil and gas 
activities. 

MIT 44 Noise reduction measures should be implemented by industry within US waters and by US 
companies internationally but especially in areas of the Arctic which have not yet been 
subjected to high levels of man-made noise. 

MIT 45 Vessel restrictions and other measures need to be implemented to mitigate ship strikes, 
including: 

• Vessels should be prohibited from sensitive areas with high levels of wildlife presence 
that are determined to be key habitat for feeding, breeding, or calving. 

• Ship routes should be clearly defined, including a process for annual review to update 
and re-route shipping around these sensitive areas. 

• Speed restrictions may also need to be considered if re-routing is not possible. 
• NMFS should require use of real-time PAM in migratory corridors and other sensitive 

areas to alert ships to the presence of whales, primarily to reduce ship-strike risk. 

MIT 46 The DEIS should clearly identify areas where activities will be prohibited to avoid any take 
of marine mammals. It should also establish a framework for calculating potential take and 
appropriate offsets 

MIT 47 Time/area closures should be included in any alternative as standard avoidance measures and 
should be expanded to include other deferral areas, including: 

• North of Dease Inlet to Smith Bay. 
• Northeast of Smith Bay. 
• Northeast of Cape Halkett where bowhead whales feed. 
• Boulder patch communities. 
• Particular caution should be taken in early fall throughout the region, when peak use of 

the Arctic by marine mammals takes place. 
• Add the Coastal Band of the Chukchi Sea (~50 miles wide) [Commenting on the original 

Lease Sale 193 draft EIS, NMFS strongly endorse[d] an alternative that would have 
avoided any federal leases out to 60 miles and specifically argued that a 25-mile buffer 
[around deferral areas] is inadequate]. 

• Expand Barrow Canyon time/area closure area to the head of Barrow Canyon (off the 
coast between Point Barrow and Point Franklin), as well as the mouth of Barrow Canyon 
along the shelf break. 

• Areas to the south of Hanna Shoal are important to walrus, bowhead whales, and gray 
whales. 

• Encourage NMFS to consider a time/area closure during the winter and spring in the 
Beaufort Sea that captures the ice fracture zone between landfast ice and the pack ice 
where ringed seal densities are the highest. 

• Nuiqsut has long asked federal agencies to create a deferral area in the 20 miles to the 
east of Cross Island. This area holds special importance for bowhead whale hunters and 
the whales. 

• NMFS should consider designing larger exclusion zones (detection-dependent or -
independent) around river mouths with anadromous fish runs to protect beluga whale 
foraging habitat, insofar as these areas are not encompassed by seasonal closures. 

• Final EIS must consider including additional (special habitat) areas and developing a 
mechanism for new areas to be added over the life of the EIS. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 55 
Comment Analysis Report 

• Any protections for Camden Bay should extend beyond the dimensions of the Bay itself 
to include areas located to the west and east, recently identified by NMFS as having 
special significance to bowhead whales. 

• Additional analysis is required related to deferral areas specific to subsistence hunting. 
Any Final EIS must confront the potential need for added coastal protections in the 
Chukchi Sea. 

• There should be a buffer zone between Burger and the coast during migration of walrus 
and other marine mammals. 

• Future measures should include time/area closures for IEAs (Important Ecological Areas) 
of the Arctic. 

MIT 48 The mitigation measures need to include clear avoidance measures and a description of 
offsets that will be used to protect and/or restore marine mammal habitat if take occurs. 

• The sensitivity of the resource (e.g., the resource is irreplaceable and where take would 
either cause irreversible impact to the species or its population or where mitigation of the 
take would have a low probability of success) and not the level of activity should dictate 
the location of avoidance areas. 

• NMFS should consider adding an Avoidance Measures section to Appendix A. 

MIT 49 The DEIS fails to address the third step in the mitigation hierarchy which is to compensate 
for unavoidable and incidental take. NMFS should provide a clear framework for 
compensatory mitigation activities. 

MIT 50 Many of the mitigation measures suggested throughout the DEIS are not applicable to in-ice 
towed streamer 2D seismic surveys and should not be required during these surveys. 

MIT 51 NMFS needs to clarify the use of adaptive management: 

• In the DEIS the term is positioned toward the use of adaptive management to further 
restrict activities and it does not leave room for adaptive management to reduce 
restrictions 

• If monitoring shows undetectable or limited impacts, an adaptive management strategy 
should allow for decreased restrictions on oil and gas exploration. The conditions under 
which decreased restrictions will occur should be plainly stated in the discussion of 
adaptive management. 

MIT 52 Aerial overflights are infeasible and risky and should not be required as a monitoring tool: 

• Such mitigation requirements are put forward only in an effort to support the 120dB 
observation zones, which are both scientifically unjustified and infeasible to implement. 

• Such over flights pose a serious safety risk. Requiring them as a condition of operating in 
the Arctic conflicts with the statutory requirements of OCSLA, which mandates safe 
operations. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 56 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 53 The purpose of Mitigation Measure A6 needs to be clarified: 

• If the purpose is to establish a shutdown zone, it is unwarranted because the nature of 
drilling operations is such that they cannot sporadically be shut down or ramped up and 
down. 

• If the purpose is the collection of research data, then it should be handled as part of the 
BOEM research program. 

MIT 54 Mitigation Measure D2: There should be no requirement for communications center 
operations during periods when industry is not allowed to operate and by definition there is 
not possibility for industry impact on the hunt. 

MIT 55 Additional Mitigation Measure A1 is problematic and should not be required: 

• Sound source verification tests take time, are expensive, and can expose people to risks. 
• Modeling should eventually be able to produce a reliable estimate of the seismic source 

emissions and propagation, so sound source verification tests should not be required 
before the start of every seismic survey in the Arctic 

• This should be eliminated unless NMFS is planning to require the same measurements 
for all vessels operating in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas. 

• Sound source verification for vessels has no value because there are no criteria for shut 
down or other mitigation associated with vessel sounds 

MIT 56 NMFS should not require monitoring measures to be designed to accomplish or contribute to 
what are in fact research goals. NMFS and others should work together to develop a research 
program targeting key research goals in a prioritized manner following appropriate scientific 
method, rather than attempting to meet these goals through monitoring associated with 
activities. 

MIT 57 Additional Mitigation Measure A3 lacks a basic description of the measure and must be 
deleted or clarified as: 

• NMFS provides no further information in the DEIS with regard to what conditions or 
situations would meet or fail to meet visibility requirements. 

• NMFS also does not indicate what exploration activities would be affected by such 
limitations. 

• Operators cannot assess the potential effects of such mitigation on their operations and 
lease obligations, or its practicability, without these specifics. 

• NMFS certainly cannot evaluate the need or efficacy of the mitigation measure without 
these details. 

• It is neither practicable nor reasonable to require observers on all support vessels, 
especially on Ocean Bottom Cable seismic operations, where support vessels often 
include small boats without adequate space for observers. 

• Cetaceans are not at significantly greater risk of harm when a soft-start is initiated in poor 
visibility conditions. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 57 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 58 Additional Mitigation Measure A4: There are limitations to current PAM technology, but its 
use may improve monitoring results in some situations and should be used during certain 
conditions, with these caveats: 

• A period of confidence in the current PAM capabilities, understanding of limitations, and 
experienced operator capacity-building is needed before requiring PAM as a mandatory 
monitoring tool during seismic operations. 

• Basic training criteria, such as that specified by many countries for PSOs, should be 
developed and required for PAM operators. 

• Minimum requirements for PAM equipment (including capabilities of software and 
hardware) should be considered. 

MIT 59 Proposed restrictions under Additional Mitigation Measure B2 are unnecessary, impractical 
and must be deleted or clarified: 

• The likelihood of redundant or duplicative surveys is small to non-existent. A new survey 
is conducted only if the value of the additional information to be provided will exceed the 
cost of acquisition. 

• The restriction is based on the false premise that surveys, which occur in similar places 
and times, are the same. A new survey may be warranted by its use of new technology, a 
better image, a different target zone, or a host of other considerations. 

• Implementing such a requirement poses several large problems. First, who would decide 
what is redundant and by what criteria? Second, recognizing the intellectual property and 
commercial property values, how will the agencies protect that information? Any 
proposal that the companies would somehow be able to self-regulate is infeasible and 
potentially illegal given the various anti-trust statutes. A government agency would likely 
find it impossible to set appropriate governing technical and commercial criteria, and 
would end up stifling the free market competition that has led to technological 
innovations and success in risk reduction. 

• This already done by industry in some cases, but as a regulatory requirement it is very 
vague and needs clarification. 

MIT 60 Additional Mitigation Measures D3, D4, D5, D6, and D8 need clarification about how the 
real-time reporting would be handled: 

• If there is the expectation that industry operations could be shutdown quickly and 
restarted quickly, the proposal is not feasible. 

• Who would conduct the monitoring for whales? 
• How and to whom would reporting be conducted? 
• How whale presence would be determined and who would make the determination must 

be elucidated in this measure? This is vague and impracticable. 
• Additional Mitigation Measure D4 should be consistent with surrounding mitigation 

measures that consider start dates of bowhead whale hunting closed areas based on real-
time reporting of whale presence and hunting activity rather than a fixed date. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 58 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 61 NMFS should work with BOEM to incorporate a broader list of mitigation measures that 
would be standard for all oil and gas-related incidental take authorizations in the Arctic 
region, including: 

a) Detection-based measures intended to reduce near-source acoustic impacts on marine 
mammals 

• require operators to use operational- and activity-specific information to estimate 
exclusion and buffer zones for all sound sources (including seismic surveys, subbottom 
profilers, vertical seismic profiling, vertical cable surveys, drilling, icebreaking, support 
aircraft and vessels, etc.) and, just prior to or as the activity begins, verify and (as needed) 
modify those zones using sound measurements collected at each site for each sound 
source; 

• assess the efficacy of mitigation and monitoring measures and improve detection 
capabilities in low visibility situations using tools such as forward-looking infrared or 
360o thermal imaging; 

• require the use of passive acoustic monitoring to increase detection probability for real-
time mitigation and monitoring of exclusion zones; and 

• require operators to cease operations when the exclusion zone is obscured by poor 
sighting conditions; 

b) Non-detection-based measures intended to lessen the severity of acoustic impacts on 
marine mammals or reduce overall numbers taken by acoustic sources 

• limit aircraft overflights to an altitude of 457 m or higher and a horizontal distance of 305 
m or greater when marine mammals are present (except during takeoff, landing, or an 
emergency situation); 

• require temporal/spatial limitations to minimize impacts in particularly important habitats 
or migratory areas, including but not limited to those identified for time-area closures 
under Alternative 4 (i.e., Camden Bay, Barrow Canyon/Western Beaufort Sea, Hanna 
Shoal, the Beaufort Sea shelf break, and Kasegaluk Lagoon/Ledy Bay critical habitat); 

• prevent concurrent, geographically overlapping surveys and surveys that would provide 
the same information as previous surveys; and 

• restrict 2D/3D surveys from operating within 145 km of one another; 

c) Measures intended to reduce/lessen non-acoustic impacts on marine mammals reduce 
vessel speed to 9 knots or less when transiting the Beaufort Sea 

• reduce vessel speed to 9 knots or less within 274 m of whales; 
• avoid changes in vessel direction and speed within 274 m of whales; 
• reduce speed to 9 knots or less in inclement weather or reduced visibility conditions; 
• use shipping or transit routes that avoid areas where marine mammals may occur in high 

densities, such as offshore ice leads; 
• establish and monitor a 160-dB re 1 µPa zone for large whales around all sound sources 

and do not initiate or continue an activity if an aggregation of bowhead whales or gray 
whales (12 or more whales of any age/sex class that appear to be engaged in a non-
migratory, significant biological behavior (e.g., feeding, socializing)) is observed within 
that zone; 

• require operators to cease drilling operations in mid- to late-September to reduce the 
possibility of having to respond to a large oil spill in ice conditions; 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 59 
Comment Analysis Report 

• require operators to develop and implement a detailed, comprehensive, and coordinated 
Wildlife Protection Plan that includes strategies and sufficient resources for minimizing 
contamination of sensitive marine mammal habitats and that provides a realistic 
description of the actions that operators can take, if any, to deter animals from spill areas 
or respond to oiled or otherwise affected marine mammals the plan should be developed 
in consultation with Alaska Native communities (including marine mammal co-
management organizations), state and federal resource agencies, and experienced non-
governmental organizations; and 

• require operators to collect all new and used drilling muds and cuttings and either reinject 
them or transport them to an EPA-licensed treatment/disposal site outside the Arctic; 

d) Measures intended to ensure no unmitigable adverse impact to subsistence users 

• require the use of Subsistence Advisors; and 
• facilitate development of more comprehensive plans of cooperation/conflict avoidance 

agreements that involve all potentially affected communities and comanagement 
organizations and account for potential adverse impacts on all marine mammal species 
taken for subsistence purposes. 

MIT 62 NMFS should include additional mitigation measures to verify compliance with mitigation 
measures and work with BOEM and industry to improve the quality and usefulness of 
mitigation and monitoring measures: 

• Track and enforce each operator’s implementation of mitigation and monitoring measures 
to ensure that they are executed as expected; provide guidance to operators regarding the 
estimation of the number of takes during the course of an activity (e.g., seismic survey) 
that guidance should be sufficiently specific to ensure that take estimates are accurate and 
include realistic estimates of precision and bias; 

• Provide additional justification for the determination that the mitigation and monitoring 
measures that depend on visual observations would be sufficient to detect, with a high 
level of confidence, all marine mammals within or entering identified mitigation zones; 

• Work with protected species observers, observer service providers, the Fish and Wildlife 
Service, and other stakeholders to establish and implement standards for protected 
species observers to improve the quality and usefulness of information collected during 
exploration activities; 

• Establish requirements for analysis of data collected by protected species observers to 
ensure that those data are used both to estimate potential effects on marine mammals and 
to inform the continuing development of mitigation and monitoring measures; 

• Require operators to make the data associated with monitoring programs publicly 
available for evaluation by independent researchers; 

• Require operators to gather the necessary data and work with the Bureau and the Service 
to assess the effectiveness of soft-starts as a mitigation measure; and 

• Require operators to suspend operations immediately if a dead or seriously injured 
marine mammal is found in the vicinity of the operations and the death or injury could be 
attributed to the applicant’s activities any suspension should remain in place until the 
Service has reviewed the situation and determined that further deaths or serious injuries 
are unlikely or has issued regulations authorizing such takes under section 101(a)(5)(A) 
of the Act. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 60 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 63 There is no need for the Additional Mitigation Measures in the DEIS and they should be 
removed: 

• Potential impacts of oil and gas exploration activities under the Standard Mitigation 
Measures, BOEM lease stipulations (MMS 2008c), and existing industry practices, are 
already negligible. 

• Analysis of the effectiveness of the Additional Mitigation Measures in reducing any 
impacts (especially for marine mammals and subsistence) was not established in the 
DEIS so there is no justification for their implementation. 

• The negative impacts these measures would have on industry and on the expeditious 
development of resources in the OCS as mandated by OCSLA are significant, and were 
not described, quantified, or seriously considered in the DEIS. 

• Any Additional Mitigation Measure carried forward must be clarified and made 
practicable, and further analysis must be conducted and presented in the FEIS to explain 
why they are needed, how they were developed (including a scientific basis), what 
conditions would trigger their implementation and how they would affect industry and 
the ability of BOEM to meet its OCSLA mandate of making resources available for 
expeditious development. 

• NMFS failed to demonstrate the need for most if not all of the Additional Mitigation 
Measures identified in the DEIS, especially Additional Mitigation Measures A4, B1 
(time/area closures), C3, D1, D5, D6, and D8. 

• NMFS has failed to fully evaluate and document the costs associated with their 
implementation. 

MIT 64 The time/area closure for Barrow Canyon needs to be clarified or removed: 

• A time area closure is indicated from September 1 to the close of Barrow’s fall bowhead 
hunt, but dates are also provided for bowhead whales (late August to early October) and 
beluga whales (mid-July to late August), which are both vague and outside the limits of 
the closure. 

• It is also not clear if Barrow Canyon and the Western Beaufort Sea Special Habitat Areas 
are one and the same. Only Barrow Canyon (not the Western Beaufort) is referenced in 
most places, including the only map (Figure 3.2-25) of the area. 

MIT 65 Additional Mitigation Measure D7 must be deleted or clarified: 

• The transit restrictions are not identified, nor are the conditions under which the transit 
might be allowed. 

• Some hunting of marine mammals in the Chukchi Sea occurs year round making this 
measure impracticable. 

MIT 66 NMFS should not automatically add Additional Mitigation Measures to an alternative without 
first assessing the impact without Additional Mitigation Measures to determine whether they 
are needed. 

MIT 67 The requirement to recycle drilling muds should not become mandatory as it is not 
appropriate for all programs. Drilling mud discharges are already regulated by the EPA 
NPDES program and are not harmful to marine mammals or the availability of marine 
mammals for subsistence. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 61 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 68 [Page 4-68] For exploratory drilling operations in the Beaufort Sea west of Cross Island, no 
drilling equipment or related vessels used for at-sea oil and gas operations shall be moved 
onsite at any location outside the barrier islands west of Cross Island until the close of the 
bowhead whale hunt in Barrow. This measure would prevent exploration of offshore leases 
west of Cross Island during the open water season and would require refunding of lease 
purchase and investment by companies that are no longer allowed to explore their leases. 

MIT 69 The statement that eliminating exploration activities through the time/area closures on Hanna 
Shoal would benefit all assemblages of marine fish, with some anticipated benefit to 
migratory fish, is incorrect. Most migratory fish would not be found in offshore waters. 

MIT 70 Standard Mitigation Measure A5 should be deleted as it is essentially the same as Standard 
Mitigation Measure A4. 

MIT 71 Standard Mitigation Measures B1 and D3 have identical requirements regarding aircraft 
operations and appear to apply to the same activities, so they should be deleted from one or 
the other. 

MIT 72 Under conditions when exploitation is determined to be acceptable, monitoring and 
mitigation plans on a wide range of temporal scales should become both a standard 
requirement and industry practice. These must be designed in a manner specific to the nature 
of the operation and the environment to minimize the risks of both acute impacts (i.e., direct, 
short-term, small-scale harm as predicted from estimates of noise exposure on individuals) 
and to measure/minimize chronic effects (i.e., cumulative, long-term, large-scale adverse 
effects on populations as predicted from contextually mediated behavioral responses or the 
loss of acoustic habitat). 

MIT 73 To date, standard practices for individual seismic surveys and other activities have been of 
questionable efficacy for monitoring or mitigating direct physical impacts (i.e., acute impacts 
on injury or hearing) and have essentially failed to address chronic, population level impacts 
from masking and other long-term, large-scale effects, which most likely are the greatest risk 
to long-term population health and viability. 

MIT 74 More meaningful monitoring and mitigation measures that should be more fully considered 
and implemented in the programmatic plans for the Arctic include: 

1) Considerations of time and area restrictions based on known sensitive periods/areas; 

2) Sustained acoustic monitoring, both autonomous and real-time, of key habitat areas to 
assess species presence and cumulative noise exposure with direct federal involvement 
and oversight; 

3) Support or incentives for research to develop and apply metrics for a population’s health, 
such as measures of vital rates, prey availability, ranging patterns, and body condition; 

4) Specified spatial-temporal separation zones between intense acoustic events; and 

5) Requirements or incentives for the reduction of acoustic footprints of intense noise 
sources. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 62 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 75 Time/area closures represent progress, but NMFS’s analysis that the closures provide limited 
benefits is faulty and needs further evaluation 

• The current analysis does not well reflect the higher densities of marine mammals in 
concentration areas and other IEAs. 

• The analysis also does not fully recognize the importance of those areas to the overall 
health of the species being impacted, and thus underestimates the likely disproportionate 
effects of activities in those areas. 

• The analysis concludes no benefit as a result of mitigating impacts. This, along with a 
lack of information to assess the size of the benefit beyond unclear and ill-defined levels, 
mistakenly results in analysts concluding there is no benefit. 

• The inability to quantitatively estimate the potential impacts of oil and gas activities, or 
express the benefits of time and area closures of important habitats, likely has much more 
to do with incomplete information than with a perceived lack of benefits from the time 
and area closures. 

MIT 76 A precautionary approach should be taken in the selection of a preferred alternative: 

• Faulty analysis, along with the clear gaps in good data for a number of species, only 
serves to bolster the need for precaution in the region. 

• While there is good information on the existence of some IEAs, the lack of information 
about why some concentration areas occur and what portion of a population of marine 
mammals uses each area hampers the ability of NMFS to determine the benefits of 
protecting the area. This lack of scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for 
postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation. 

MIT 77 Ledyard Bay and Kasegaluk Lagoon merit special protection through time/area closures. 
Walrus also utilize these areas from June through September, with large haulouts on the 
barrier islands of Kasegaluk Lagoon in late August and September. 

MIT 78 Hanna Shoal merits special protection through time/area closures. It is also a migration area 
for bowhead whales in the fall and used by polar bears. 

MIT 79 Barrow Canyon merits considerable protection through time/area closures. In the spring, a 
number of marine mammals use this area, including bowhead whales, beluga whales, bearded 
seals, ringed seals, and polar bears. In the summer and fall this area is also important for gray 
whales, walrus, and bearded seals. 

MIT 80 NMFS should create a system where as new and better information becomes available there 
is opportunity to add and adjust areas to protect important habitat. 

MIT 81 There is no point to analyzing hypothetical additional mitigation measures in a DEIS that is a 
theoretical analysis of potential measures undertaken in the absence of a specific activity, 
location or time. If these measures were ever potentially relevant, reanalysis in a project- 
specific NEPA document would be required. 

MIT 82 NMFS needs to expand and update its list of mitigation measures to include: 

• Zero discharge requirement to protect water quality and subsistence resources. 
• Require oil and gas companies who are engaging in exploration operations to obtain EPA 

issued air permits. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 63 
Comment Analysis Report 

• More stringent regulation of marine vessel discharge for both exploratory drilling 
operations, support vessels, and other operations to eliminate possible environmental 
contamination through the introduction of pathogens and foreign organisms through 
ballast water, waste water, sewage, and other discharge streams 

• The requirement that industry signs a Conflict Avoidance Agreement (CAA) with the 
relevant marine mammal co-management organizations 

• Another Standard Mitigation Measure should be developed with regards to marine 
mammal monitoring during darkness and inclement weather. This should require more 
efficient and appropriate protocols. If more appropriate monitoring methods cannot be 
developed, NMFS should not allow for seismic surveys during times when monitoring is 
severely limited. 

• NMFS should consider for mitigation a requirement that seismic survey vessels use the 
lowest practicable source levels, minimize horizontal propagation of the sound signal, 
and/or minimize the density of track lines consistent with the purposes of the survey. 
Accordingly, the agencies should consider establishing a review panel, potentially 
overseen by both NMFS and BOEM, to review survey designs with the aim of reducing 
their wildlife impacts 

• A requirement that all vessels undergo measurement for their underwater noise output per 
American National Standards Institute/Acoustical Society of America standards (S12.64); 
that all vessels undergo regular maintenance to minimize propeller cavitation, which is 
the primary contributor to underwater ship noise; and/or that all new vessels be required 
to employ the best ship quieting designs and technologies available for their class of ship 

• NMFS should consider requiring aerial monitoring and/or fixed hydrophone arrays to 
reduce the risk of near-source injury and monitor for impacts 

• Make MMOs (PSOs) mandatory on the vessels. 
• Unmanned flights should also be investigated for monitoring, as recommended by 

NMFS’s Open Water Panel. 
• Mitigation and monitoring measures concerning the introduction of non-native species 

need to be identified and analyzed 

MIT 83 Both the section on water quality and subsistence require a discussion of mitigation measures 
and how NMFS intends to address local community concerns about contamination of 
subsistence food from sanitary waste and drilling muds and cuttings. 

MIT 84 NMFS must discuss the efficacy of mitigation measures: 

• Including safety zones, start-up and shut-down procedures, use of Marine Mammal 
Observers during periods of limited visibility for preventing impacts to bowhead whales 
and the subsistence hunt. 

• Include discussion of the significant scientific debate regarding the effectiveness of many 
mitigation measures that are included in the DEIS and that have been previously used by 
industry as a means of complying with the MMPA. 

• We strongly encourage NMFS to include in either Chapter 3 or Chapter 4 a separate 
section devoted exclusively to assessing whether and to what extent each individual 
mitigation measure is effective at reducing impacts to marine mammals and the 
subsistence hunt. NMFS should use these revised portions of the DEIS to discuss and 
analyze compliance with the "least practicable adverse impact" standard of the MMPA. 

• NMFS must discuss to what extent visual monitoring is effective as a means of triggering 
mitigation measures, and, if so, how specifically visual monitoring can be structured or 
supplemented with acoustic monitoring to improve performance. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 64 
Comment Analysis Report 

• NMFS should clearly analyze whether poor visibility restrictions are appropriate and 
whether those restrictions are necessary to comply with the "least practicable impact" 
standard of the MMPA. 

• NMFS should disclose in the EIS uncertainties as to the efficacy of ramp up procedures 
and then discuss and analyze how that uncertainty relates to an estimate of impacts to 
marine mammals and, in particular, bowhead whales. 

• This EIS is an important opportunity for NMFS to assess the efficacy of these proposed 
measures with the full input of the scientific community before making a decision on 
overall levels of industrial activity in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas. NMFS should, 
therefore, amend the DEIS to include such an analysis, which can then be subject to 
further public review and input pursuant to a renewed public comment period. 

MIT 85 NMFS must include in a revised DEIS a discussion of additional deferral areas and a 
reasoned analysis of whether and to what extent those deferral areas would benefit our 
subsistence practices and habitat for the bowhead whale. 

MIT 86 NMFS needs to revise the DEIS to include a more complete description of the proposed 
mitigation measures, eliminate the concept of "additional mitigation measures," and then 
decide in the Record of Decision on a final suite of applicable mitigation measures. 

MIT 87 The peer review panel states that "a single sound source pressure level or other single 
descriptive parameter is likely a poor predictor of the effects of introduced anthropogenic 
sound on marine life." The panel recommends that NMFS develop a "soundscape" approach 
to management, and it was understood that the NSB Department of Wildlife suggested such 
an alternative, which was rejected by NMFS. If NMFS moves forward with using simple 
measures, it is recommended that these measures "should be based on the more 
comprehensive ecosystem assessments and they should be precautionary to compensate for 
remaining uncertainty in potential effects." NMFS should clarify how these concerns are 
reflected in the mitigation measures set forth in the DEIS and whether the simple sound 
pressure level measures are precautionary as suggested by the peer review panel. 

MIT 88 NMFS needs to clarify why it is using 160 dB re 1 Pa rms as the threshold for level B take. 
Clarification is needed on whether exposure of feeding whales to sounds up to 160 dB re 1 
µPa rms could cause adverse effects, and, if so, why the threshold for level B harassment is 
not lower. 

MIT 89 NMFS should consider implementing mitigation measures designed to avoid exposing 
migrating bowhead whales to received sound levels of 120dB or greater given the best 
available science, which demonstrates that such noise levels cause behavioral changes in 
bowhead whales. 

MIT 90 The DEIS does not list aerial surveys as a standard or additional mitigation measure for either 
the Beaufort or Chukchi Sea. There is no reasonable scientific basis for this. NMFS should 
include aerial surveys as a possible mitigation measure along with a discussion of the peer 
review panel's concerns regarding this issue. 

MIT 91 Standard mitigation measures are needed to protect autumn bowhead hunting at Barrow, 
Wainwright, and possibly at Point Lay and Point Hope and subsistence hunting of beluga 
whales at Point Lay and Wainwright and seal and walrus hunting along the Chukchi Sea 
coasts. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 65 
Comment Analysis Report 

• One approach for protecting beluga hunting at Point Lay would be to implement adaptive 
management; whereby, ships and drill rigs would not come within 60 miles of the 
community of Point Lay until the beluga hunt is completed. 

• These types of mitigation measures should be standard and should be applied to any ITA. 

MIT 92 The mitigation measure related to discharge of drilling muds does not address the current 
industry plan of recycling muds and then discharging any unused or remaining muds at the 
end of the season. At the very least, no drilling muds should be discharged. 

• Furthermore, using the best management practice of near- zero discharge, as is being 
implemented by Shell in Camden Bay in the Beaufort Sea, would be the best method for 
mitigating impacts to marine mammals and ensuring that habitat is kept as clean and 
healthy as possible. 

MIT 93 Reduction levels associated with Additional Mitigation Measure C3 should be specified and 
applied to marine vessel traffic supporting operations as well as drill ships. 

MIT 94 NMFS should consider using an independent panel to review survey designs. For example, an 
independent peer review panel has been established to evaluate survey design of the Central 
Coastal California Seismic Imaging Project, which is aimed at studying fault systems near the 
Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant. See California Public Utilities Commission, Application 
of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for Approval of Ratepayer Funding to Perform 
Additional Seismic Studies Recommended by the California Energy Commission: Decision 
Granting the Application, available at 
docs.cpuc.ca.gov/PUBLISHED/FINAL_DECISION/122059-09.htm. 

MIT 95 Use additional best practices for monitoring and maintaining safety zones around active 
airgun arrays and other high-intensity underwater noise sources as set forth in Weir and 
Dolman (2007) and Parsons et al. (2009) 

MIT 96 The existing draft EIS makes numerous errors regarding mitigation: 

• Mischaracterizing the effectiveness and practicability of particular measures 
• Failing to analyze variations of measures that may be more effective than the ones 

proposed 
• Failing to standardize measures that are plainly effective. 

MIT 97 Language regarding whether or not standard mitigation measures are required is confusing, 
and NMFS should make clear that this mitigation is indeed mandatory. 

MIT 98 The rationale for not including mitigation limiting activities in low-visibility conditions, 
which can reduce the risk of ship-strikes and near-field noise exposures, as standard 
mitigation is flawed, and this measure needs to be included: 

• First, it suggests that the restriction could extend the duration of a survey and thus the 
potential for cumulative disturbance of wildlife; but this concern would not apply to 
activities in migratory corridors, since target species like bowhead whales are transient. 

• Second, while it suggests that the requirement would be expensive to implement, it does 
not consider the need to reduce ship-strike risk in heavily-used migratory corridors in 
order to justify authorization of an activity under the IHA process. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 66 
Comment Analysis Report 

• This requirement should be standardized for all activities involving moving vessels that 
occur in bowhead whale migratory corridors during the latter parts of the open-water 
season (i.e., September-October); and for all transits of support vessels in all areas at all 
times. 

MIT 99 NMFS fails to consider a number of recent studies on temporary threshold shift in 
establishing its 180/190 dB safety zone standard. NMFS should conservatively recalculate its 
safety zone distances in light of these studies, which indicate the need for larger safety zones, 
especially for the harbor porpoise: 

1) A controlled exposure experiment demonstrating that harbor porpoises are substantially 
more susceptible to temporary threshold shift than the two species, bottlenose dolphins 
and beluga whales, that have previously been tested; 

2) A modeling effort indicating that, when uncertainties and individual variation are 
accounted for, a significant number of whales could suffer temporary threshold shift 
beyond 1 km from a seismic source; 

3) Studies suggesting that the relationship between temporary and permanent threshold shift 
may not be as predictable as previously believed; and 

4) The oft-cited Southall et al. (2007), which suggests use of a cumulative exposure metric 
for temporary threshold shift in addition to the present RMS metric, given the potential 
occurrence of multiple surveys within reasonably close proximity. 

MIT 100 The DEIS improperly rejects the 120 dB safety zone for bowhead whales and the 160 dB 
safety zone for bowhead and gray whales that have been used in IHAs over the past five 
seasons: 

• It claims that the measure is ineffective because it has never yet been triggered, but does 
not consider whether a less stringent, more easily triggered threshold might be more 
appropriate given the existing data. For example, the DEIS fails to consider whether 
requiring observers to identify at least 12 whales within the 160 dB safety zone, and then 
to determine that the animals are engaged in a nonmigratory, biologically significant 
behavior, might not constitute too high a bar, and whether a different standard would 
provide a greater conservation benefit while enabling survey activity. 

MIT 101 The assertion by industry regarding the overall safety of conducting fixed-wing aircraft 
monitoring flights in the Arctic, especially in the Chukchi Sea, should be reviewed in light of 
the multiple aerial surveys that are now being conducted there (e.g., COMIDA and Shell is 
planning to implement an aerial monitoring program extending 37 kilometers from the shore, 
as it has for a number of years) 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 67 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 102 The DEIS implies that requiring airgun surveys to maintain a 90-mile separation distance 
would reduce impacts in some circumstances but not in others, depending on the area of 
operation, season, and whether whales are feeding or migrating. 

• NMFS does not provide any biological basis for this finding. 
• This analysis fails to consider that the measure would affect only the timing, not the 

spatial extent of the survey effort: the overall area of ensonification would remain the 
same over the course of a season since survey activities would only be separated, not 
curtailed. 

• If NMFS believes that surveys should not be separated in all cases, it should consider a 
measure that defines the conditions in which greater separation would be required. 

MIT 103 The DEIS should also consider to what degree the time/place restrictions could protect 
marine mammals from some of the harmful effects from an oil spill. Avoiding exploration 
drilling during times when marine mammals may be concentrated nearby could help to 
ameliorate the more severe impacts discussed in the DEIS. 

MIT 104 Avoiding exploratory drilling proximate to the spring lead system and avoiding late season 
drilling would help to reduce the risk of oil contaminating the spring lead. At a minimum, 
NMFS should consider timing restrictions in the Chukchi Sea to avoid activities taking place 
too early in the open water season. 

MIT 105 The DEIS’ reliance on future mitigation measures required by the FWS and undertaken by 
industry is unjustified. It refers to measures typically required through the MMPA and 
considers that it is in industry’s self-interest to avoid harming bears. The draft EIS cannot 
simply assume that claimed protections resulting from the independent efforts of others will 
mitigate for potential harm. 

MIT 106 Adaptive management should be used, instead of arbitrary closure dates. To set firm dates for 
closures does not take into account what is actually happening. An area should not be closed 
if there are no animals there. 

MIT 107 The stipulations that are put in or the mitigations that are put in in the Beaufort should not 
affect activity in the Chukchi. They are two different worlds, if you think about it, the depth 
of the ocean, the movement of the ice, the distance away from our subsistence activity. Don't 
take the Beaufort restrictions and make it harder for the Chukchi to do good work. 

MIT 108 Only grant permits and allow work when whaling is not occurring. 

MIT 109 Specific dates are listed for the time/area closures proposed in the alternatives, but dates for 
closures need to be flexible to adjust for changes in migration; fixed dates are very difficult to 
change. 

MIT 110 The MMO (PSO) program is not very effective: 

• Only MMOs who are ethical and work hard see marine mammals 
• There is no oversight to make sure the MMO was actually working 

MIT 111 The most effective means of creating mitigation that works is to start small and focused and 
reassess after a couple of seasons to determine what works and what doesn’t work. Mitigation 
measures could then be adjusted to match reality. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 68 
Comment Analysis Report 

MIT 112 There should be a mechanism by which the public can be apprised of and provide input on 
the efficacy of mitigation efforts. Suggestions include: 

• Something similar to the Open Water meetings 
• Put out a document about the assumptions upon which all these NEPA documents and 

permits are based and assess mitigation: Are they working, how did they work, what were 
the problems and challenges, where do we need to focus attention. 

• Include dates if something unusual happened that season that would provide an 
opportunity to contact NOAA or BOEM or whoever and say, hey, by the way, during this 
thing we noticed this or whatever. 

• This would just help us to again refine our mitigation recommendations in the future. 

MIT 113 If explosives are used, there needs to be mitigation to ensure that the explosives are 
accounted for. 

MIT 114 NMFS should require that zero discharge technology be implemented for all drilling 
proposals. 

MIT 115 Standard Mitigation Measure C4 should be deleted. All exploration drilling programs are 
required by regulation to have oil spill response plans. Stating regulatory requirements is not 
a mitigation measure. 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 69 
Comment Analysis Report 

Marine Mammal and other Wildlife Impacts (MMI) 
MMI General comments related to potential impacts to marine mammals or wildlife, unrelated to 

subsistence resource concepts. 

MMI 1 The DEIS improperly dismisses the risk of mortality and serious injury from acoustic 
impacts: 

• The DEIS fails to consider the adverse synergistic effect that at least some types of 
anthropogenic noise can have on ship-strike risk (for example mid-frequency sounds with 
frequencies in the range of some sub-bottom profilers have been shown to cause North 
Atlantic right whales to break off their foraging dives and lie just below the surface, 
increasing the risk of vessel strike). 

• Recent studies indicate that anthropogenic sound can induce permanent threshold shift at 
lower levels than anticipated. 

• Hearing loss remains a significant risk where, as here, the agency has not required aerial 
or passive acoustic monitoring as standard mitigation, appears unwilling to restrict 
operations in low-visibility conditions, and has not firmly established seasonal exclusion 
areas for biologically important habitat. 

• The DEIS discounts the potential for marine mammal strandings, even though at least one 
stranding event of beaked whales in the Gulf of California correlated with geophysical 
survey activity. 

• The DEIS makes no attempt to assess the long-term effects of chronic noise and noise-
related stress on life expectancy and survival, although terrestrial animals could serve as a 
proxy. 

• The agencies’ reliance on monitoring for adaptive management, and their assurance that 
activities will be reassessed if serious injury or mortality occurs, is inappropriate given 
the probability that even catastrophic declines in Arctic populations would go 
unobserved. 

• The DEIS fails to address the wide-ranging impacts that repeated, high-intensity airgun 
surveys will have on wildlife. 

• We know far too little about these vulnerable [endangered] species to ensure that the 
industry's constant pounding does not significantly impact their populations or jeopardize 
their survival. 

MMI 2 Loss of sea-ice habitat due to climate change may make polar bears, ice seals, and walrus 
more vulnerable to impacts from oil and gas activities, which needs to be considered in the 
EIS. The DEIS needs to adequately consider impacts in the context of climate change: 

• The added stress of habitat loss due to climate change should form a greater part of the 
DEIS analysis. 

• Both polar bears and ringed seals may be affected by multiple-year impacts from 
activities associated with drilling (including an associated increase in vessel traffic) given 
their dependence on sea-ice and its projected decline. 

• Shifts in distribution and habitat use by polar bears and walrus in the Beaufort and 
Chukchi seas attributable to loss of sea ice habitat is insufficiently incorporated into the 
DEIS analysis. The DEIS only asserts that possible harm to subsistence and to polar bear 
habitat from oil and gas operations would be negligible compared to the potential for 
dramatic sea ice loss due to climate change and changes in ecosystems due to ocean 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 70 
Comment Analysis Report 

acidification. For walrus and ice seals, the DEIS simply notes potentially catastrophic 
climate effects without adequately considering how oil and gas activities might leave 
species more vulnerable to that outcome. 

• Sub-adult polar bears that return to land in summer because of sea-ice loss are more 
likely to be impacted by activities in the water, onshore support of open water activities, 
and oil spills; this could represent potentially major impacts to polar bear populations and 
should be considered in any final EIS. 

• Walrus feeding grounds are being transformed and walrus are hauling out on land in large 
numbers, leaving them vulnerable to land-based disturbances. 

MMI 3 In addition to noise, drilling wastes, air pollution, habitat degradation, shipping, and oil spills 
would also adversely affect marine mammals. These adverse effects are ethical issues that 
need to be considered. 

MMI 4 Seismic airgun surveys are more disruptive to marine mammals than suggested by the 
“unlikely impacts” evaluation peppered throughout the DEIS: 

• They are known to disrupt foraging behavior at distances greater than the typical 1000 
meter observation/mitigation threshold. 

• Beluga whales are known to avoid seismic surveys at distances greater than 10 km. 
• Behavioral disturbance of bowhead whales have been observed at distances of 7km to 

35km. 
• Marine mammals are seen in significantly lower numbers during seismic surveys 

indicating impacts beyond the standard 1000 meter mitigation set-back. 
• Impacts may vary depending on circumstances and conditions and should not be 

dismissed just because of a few studies that indicate only “negligible” impacts. 

MMI 5 The high probability for disruption or “take” of marine mammals in the water by helicopters 
and other heavy load aircraft during the spring and summer months is not adequately 
addressed in the DEIS. 

MMI 6 Impacts on Arctic fish species, fish habitat, and fisheries are poorly understood and 
inadequately presented in the DEIS. NMFS should consider the following: 

• The DEIS substantially understates the scale of impact on Arctic fish species, and fails to 
consider any measures to mitigate their effects. 

• Airgun surveys are known to significantly affect the distribution of some fish species, 
which can impact fisheries and displace or reduce the foraging success of marine 
mammals that rely on them for prey. 

• Airguns have been shown experimentally to dramatically depress catch rates of some 
commercial fish species, by 40 to 80 percent depending on catch method, over thousands 
of square kilometers around a single array. 

• While migratory fish may evade threats by swimming away, many fish, especially 
sedentary fish, will “entrench” into their safe zone when threatened, and prolong 
exposure to potentially damaging stimulus. Assuming that fish will “move out harm’s 
way” is an irresponsible management assumption and needs to be verified prior to stating 
that “enough information exists to perform a full analysis.” 

• Impacts on fisheries were found to last for some time beyond the survey period, not fully 
recovering within 5 days of post-survey monitoring. 

• The DEIS appears to assume without support that effects on both fish and fisheries would 
be localized. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 71 
Comment Analysis Report 

• Fish use sound for communication, homing, and other important purposes, and can 
experience temporary or permanent hearing loss on exposure to intense sound. 

• Other impacts on commercially harvested fish include reduced reproductive performance 
and mortality or decreased viability of fish eggs and larvae. 

• A rigorous analysis is necessary to assess direct and indirect impacts of industry activities 
on rare fish populations. 

• The DEIS lacks a rigorous analysis of noise impacts to fish, particularly relating to the 
interaction of two or more acoustic sources (e.g., two seismic surveys). 

• A rigorous analysis is needed that investigates how two or more noise generating 
activities interact to displace fish moving/feeding along the coast, as acoustic barriers 
may interrupt natural processes important to the life cycle and reproductive success of 
some fish species/populations. 

MMI 7 Impacts of seismic airgun surveys on squid, sea turtles, cephalopods, and other invertebrates 
need to be included and considered in terms of the particular species and their role as prey of 
marine mammals and commercial and protected fish. 

MMI 8 Oil and gas leasing, exploration, and development in the Arctic Ocean has had no known 
adverse impact on marine mammal species and stocks, and the reasonably anticipated impacts 
to marine mammals from OCS exploration activities occurring in the next five years are, at 
most, negligible. 

• There is no evidence that serious injury, death, or stranding by marine mammals can 
occur from exposure to airgun pulses, even in the case of large airgun arrays. 

• No whales or other marine mammals have been killed or injured by past seismic 
operations. 

• The western Arctic bowhead whale population has been increasing for over 20 years, 
suggesting impacts of oil and gas industry on individual survival and reproduction in the 
past have likely been minor. 

• These activities are unlikely to have any effect on the other four stocks of bowhead 
whales. 

• Only the western North Pacific stock of humpback whales and the Northeast Pacific 
stock of fin whales would be potentially affected by oil and gas leasing and exploration 
activities in the Chukchi Sea. There would be no effect on the remaining worldwide 
stocks of humpback or fin whales. 

• Most impacts would be due to harassment of whales, which may lead to behavioral 
reactions from which recovery is fairly rapid. 

• There is no evidence of any biologically significant impacts at the individual or 
population level. 

MMI 9 Noise impacts on key habitats and important biological behaviors of marine mammals (e.g., 
breeding, feeding, communicating) could cause detrimental effects at the population level. 
Consider the following: 

• According to an IWC Scientific Committee report, repeated and persistent exposure of 
noise across a large area could cause detrimental impacts to marine mammal populations 

• A recent study associated reduced underwater noise with a reduction in stress hormones, 
providing evidence that noise may contribute to long-term stress (negatively affecting 
growth, immune response to diseases, and reproduction) for individuals and populations 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 72 
Comment Analysis Report 

MMI 10 Most marine mammals primarily rely on their acoustic sense, and they would likely suffer 
more from noise exposure than other species. While marine mammals have seemingly 
developed strategies to deal with noise and related shipping traffic (e.g., changing 
vocalizations, shifting migration paths, etc.), the fact that some species have been exposed to 
anthropogenic changes for only one generation (e.g., bowhead whales) makes it unlikely that 
they have developed coping mechanisms appropriate to meet novel environmental pressures, 
such as noise. Marine mammals living in relatively pristine environments, such as the Arctic 
Ocean, and have less experience with noise and shipping traffic may experience magnified 
impacts. 

MMI 11 Impacts from ship-strikes (fatal and non-fatal) need to be given greater consideration, 
especially with increased ship traffic and the development of Arctic shipping routes. 

• Potential impacts on beluga whales and other resources in Kotzebue Sound needs to be 
considered with vessels traveling past this area. 

• There is great concern for ship strikes of bowhead and other whales and these significant 
impacts must be addressed in conjunction with the project alternatives. 

MMI 12 Walrus could also be affected by operations in the Bering Sea. For instance, the winter range 
and the summer range for male and subadult walrus could place them within the Bering Sea, 
potentially overlapping with bottom trawling. 

MMI 13 Surveys recently conducted during the open water season documented upwards of a thousand 
walrus in a proposed exploratory drilling (study) area, potentially exposing a large number of 
walrus to stresses associated with oil and gas activity, including drilling and vessel activity. 
Since a large proportion of these animals in the Chukchi Sea are comprised of females and 
calves, it is possible that the production of the population could be differentially affected. 

MMI 14 The DEIS analysis does not adequately consider the fact that many animals avoid vessels 
regardless of whether they are emitting loud sounds and may increase that avoidance distance 
during seismic operations (Richardson et al. 2011). Therefore, it should be a reasonable 
assumption that natural avoidance serves to provide another level of protection to the 
animals. 

The 120 dB threshold may represent a lower level at which some individual marine mammals 
will exhibit minor avoidance responses. While this avoidance might, in some but not all 
circumstances, be meaningful to a native hunter, scientific research does not indicate 
dramatic responses in most animals. In fact, the detailed statistical analyses often needed to 
confirm subtle changes in direction are not available. The significance of a limited avoidance 
response (to the animal) likely is minor (Richardson et al. 2011). 

MMI 15 Seismic operations are most often in timescales of weeks and reduce the possibility of 
significant displacement since they do not persist in an area for an extended period of time. 
However, little evidence of area-wide displacement exists or has been demonstrated. 

MMI 16 Bowhead Cows Do NOT Abandon or Separate from Their Calves in Response to Seismic 
Exploration or Other Human Activities. There is no scientific support whatsoever for any 
assumption or speculation that seismic operations have such impacts or could result in the 
loss or injury of a whale. To the contrary, all of the scientific evidence shows that seismic and 
other anthropogenic activities, including commercial whaling, have not been shown to cause 
the separation or abandonment of cow/calf pairs. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 73 
Comment Analysis Report 

MMI 17 Bowhead Whales Do Not Routinely Deflect 20 Kilometers From Seismic Operations. The 
DEIS asserts that bowhead whales have rarely been observed within 20 kilometers of active 
seismic operations but fails to utilize other information that challenge the validity of this 
assertion. 

MMI 18 In the Arctic, sound levels follow a highly distinct seasonal pattern dominated in winter by 
ice-related sound and then altered by sound from wind, waves, vessels, seismic surveys, and 
drilling in the open-water period. The sound signatures (i.e., frequency, intensity, duration, 
variability) of the various sources are either well known or easily described and, for any 
given region, they should be relatively predictable. The primary source of anthropogenic 
sound in the Arctic during the open-water season is oil and gas-related seismic activity, and 
those activities can elevate sound levels by 2-8 dB (Roth et al. 2012). NMFS and BOEM 
should be able to compare seasonal variations in the Arctic soundscape to the movement 
patterns and natural histories of marine mammals and to subsistence hunting patterns. 

MMI 19 The lack of observed avoidance is not necessarily indicative of a lack of impact (e.g., animals 
that have a learned tolerance of sound and remain in biologically important areas may still 
incur physiological [stress] costs from exposure or suffer significant communication 
masking). NMFS should exhibit caution when interpreting these cases. 

MMI 20 Marine mammal concentration areas are one potential example of IEAs that require robust 
management measures to ensure the health of the ecosystem as a whole. Impacts to marine 
mammal concentration areas, especially those areas where multiple marine mammal species 
are concentrated in a particular place and time, are more likely to cascade throughout 
populations and ecosystems. 

• Displacement from a high-density feeding area, in the absence of alternate feeding areas, 
may be energetically stressful. 

MMI 21 NMFS should include a discussion of the recent disease outbreak affecting seals and walrus, 
include this outbreak as part of the baseline, and discuss how potential similar future events 
(of unknown origin) are likely to increase in the future. 

MMI 22 Short-term displacement that occurs during a critical and stressful portion on the animals 
annual life cycle (e.g., molt in seals) could further increase stress to displaced individuals and 
needs to be considered. 

• Disturbance to ringed and bearded seals from spill clean-up activities during the early 
summer molt period would greatly increase stress to these species. 

MMI 23 The DEIS must further explore a threat of biologically significant effects, since as much as 25 
percent of the EIS project area could be exposed to 120 dB sound levels known to provoke 
significant behavioral reactions in migrating bowhead whales, multiple activities could result 
in large numbers of bowhead whales potentially excluded from feeding habitat, exploration 
activities would occur annually over the life of the EIS, and there is a high likelihood of 
drilling around Camden Bay. 

MMI 24 The DEIS should compare the extent of past activities and the amount of noise produced to 
what is projected with the proposed activities under the alternatives, and the DEIS must also 
consider the fact that the bowhead population may be approaching carrying capacity, 
potentially altering the degree to which it can withstand repeated disturbances. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 74 
Comment Analysis Report 

MMI 25 Impacts to beluga whales needs to be more thoroughly considered: 

• Beluga whales’ strong reactions to higher frequencies illustrate the failure of the DEIS to 
calculate ensonified zones for sub-bottom profilers, side scan sonar, and echosounders 

• The DEIS does not discuss beluga whales’ well-documented reaction to ships and ice 
breakers in the context of surveying with ice breaker support or exploratory drilling. Ice 
management activity has the potential to disturb significant numbers of beluga whale 

• The DEIS makes very little effort to estimate where and when beluga whales might be 
affected by oil and gas activities. If noise disrupts important behaviors (mating, nursing, 
or feeding), or if animals are displaced from important habitat over long periods of time, 
then impacts of noise and disturbance could affect the long-term survival of the 
population. 

MMI 26 NMFS should consider whether ice management or ice breaking have the potential to 
seriously injure or kill ice seals resting on pack ice, including in the area of Hanna Shoal that 
is an important habitat for bearded seals. 

MMI 27 NMFS should consider that on-ice surveys may directly disrupt nursing polar bears in their 
dens and ringed seals in their lairs, potentially causing abandonment, or mortality if the dens 
or lairs are crushed by machinery. 

MMI 28 The DEIS’ analysis for gray whales is faulty: 

• Gray whales were grouped with other cetaceans, so more attention specific to gray 
whales is needed. 

• Contrary to what the DEIS claims (without support), gray whale feeding and migration 
patterns do not closely mimic those of bowhead whales: gray whales migrate south to 
Mexico and typically no farther north than the Chukchi Sea, and are primarily benthic 
feeders. 

• Analysis of the effects for Alternatives 2 and 3 does not discuss either the gray whale’s 
reliance on the Chukchi Sea for its feeding or its documented preference for Hanna 
Shoal. 

• In another comparisons to bowhead whales, the DEIS states that both populations 
increased despite previous exploration activities. Gray whale numbers, however, have 
declined since Endangered Species Act (ESA) protections were removed in 1994, and 
there is speculation that the population is responding to environmental limitations. 

• Gray whales can be disturbed by very low levels of industrial noise, with feeding 
disruptions occurring at noise levels of 110 dB. 

• The DEIS needs to more adequately consider effects of activities and possible closure 
areas in the Chukchi Sea (e.g., Hanna Shoal) on gray whales. When discussing the 
possibility that area closures could concentrate effects elsewhere, the DEIS focuses on 
the Beaufort Sea, such as on the Beaufort shelf between Harrison Bay and Camden Bay 
during those time periods. 

MMI 29 There needs to be more analysis of noise and other disturbance effects specific to harbor 
porpoise; the DEIS acknowledges that harbor porpoise have higher relative abundance in the 
Chukchi Sea than other marine mammals. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 75 
Comment Analysis Report 

MMI 30 NMFS should conduct more rigorous analysis for birds and mammals, including: 

• How do multiple seismic surveys in the same region modify the foraging of marine birds 
(e.g., where forage fish have been displaced to deeper water or away from nesting areas) 

• How do multiple surveys interact to modify marine mammal foraging? 

MMI 31 NMFS should analyze the impacts to invertebrate and fish resources of introducing artificial 
structures (i.e., drilling platform and catenaries; seafloor structures) into the water column or 
the seafloor. 

MMI 32 The DEIS should address that sometimes the best geological prospects happen to conflict 
with some of the marine mammal productivity areas, calving areas, or birthing areas. 

MMI 33 It is important for NMFS to look at the possibility of affecting a global population of marine 
mammals; just not what's existing here, but a global population. 

MMI 34 NMFS should reexamine the DEIS’s analysis of sockeye and coho salmon. Comments 
include: 

• The known northern distribution of coho salmon from southern Alaska ends at about 
Point Hope (Mecklenburg et al. 2002). 

• Sockeye salmon’s (O. nerka) North Pacific range ends at Point Hope (Mecklenburg et al. 
2002). 

• Both sockeye and coho salmon are considered extremely rare in the Beaufort Sea, 
representing no more than isolated migrants from populations in southern Alaska or 
Russian (Mecklenburg et al. 2002). 

• The discussion of coho salmon and sockeye salmon EFH on pages 3-74 to 3-75 is 
unnecessary and should be deleted. 

MMI 35 NMFS should reconsider the DEIS’ analysis of Chinook salmon and possibly include the 
species based on the small but significant numbers of the species that are harvested in the 
Barrow domestic fishery. 

MMI 36 Given that the time/area closures are for marine mammals, Alternative 4 would be irrelevant 
and generally benign in terms of fish and EFH, so it is wrong to state that the closures would 
further reduce impact. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 76 
Comment Analysis Report 

National Energy Demand and Supply (NED) 
NED Comments related to meeting national energy demands, supply of energy. 

NED 1 The DEIS, as written, would preclude future development by limiting the number of activities 
and make development uneconomical, which undermines the Obama Administration’s 
priority of developing oil and gas deposits in the Arctic. Allowing safe and responsible 
development of oil and gas resources in the Alaska OCS is critical for the U.S. energy policy, 
and for the Alaskan economy. Alaska needs to be able to develop its natural resources. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 77 
Comment Analysis Report 

NEPA (NEP) 
NEP Comments on aspects of the NEPA process (purpose and need, scoping, public involvement, 

etc.), issues with the impact criteria (Chapter 4), or issues with the impact analysis. 

NEP 1 The scope of the DEIS is flawed, and misaligned with any incidental take action that NMFS 
might take under authority of the MMPA. MMPA ITAs may only be issued if the anticipated 
incidental take is found to have no more than a negligible impact. There can never be a 
purpose or need to prepare an EIS to evaluate the impact of actions that must have no more 
than a negligible impact. Accordingly, there is no need now, nor can there ever be a need, for 
NMFS to prepare an EIS in order to issue an MMPA ITA. NMFS' decision to prepare an EIS 
reflects a serious disconnect between its authority under the MMPA and its NEPA analysis. 

NEP 2 The EIS should be limited exclusively to exploration activities. Any additional complexities 
associated with proposed future extraction should be reviewed in their own contexts. 

NEP 3 The ‘need’ for the EIS presupposes the extraction of hydrocarbons from the Arctic and makes 
the extraction of discovered hydrocarbons inevitable by stating that NMFS and BOEM will 
tier from this EIS to support future permitting decisions if such activities fall outside the 
scope of the EIS. 

NEP 4 The purpose and need of this DEIS is described and structured as though NMFS intends to 
issue five-year Incidental Take Regulations (ITRs) for all oil and gas activities in the Arctic 
Ocean regarding all marine mammal species. However, there is no such pending proposal 
with NMFS for any ITRs for any oil and gas activity in the Arctic Ocean affecting any marine 
mammal stock or population. The DEIS is not a programmatic NEPA analysis. Accordingly, 
were NMFS to complete this NEPA process, there would be no five-year ITR decision for it 
to make and no Record of Decision (ROD) to issue. Because the IHA process is working 
adequately, and there is no basis for NMFS to initiate an ITR process, this DEIS is 
disconnected from any factual basis that would provide a supporting purpose and need. 

NEP 5 The scope of NEPA analysis directed to issuance of any form of MMPA ITA should be 
necessarily limited to the impacts of the anticipated take on the affected marine mammal 
stocks, and there is no purpose or need for NMFS to broadly analyze the impacts of future oil 
and gas activities in general. Impacts on, for example, terrestrial mammals, birds, fish, land 
use, and air quality are irrelevant in this context because in issuing IHAs (or, were one 
proposed, an ITR), NMFS is only authorizing take of marine mammals. The scope of the 
current DEIS is vastly overbroad and does not address any specific ITA under the MMPA. 

NEP 6 The stated purpose of the DEIS has expanded significantly to include the evaluation of 
potential effects of a Very Large Oil Spill, as well as the potential effects of seismic activity 
and alternate approaches for BOEM to issue G&G permit decisions. Neither of these topics 
were considered in the original 2007 DEIS. The original assumption was that the DEIS would 
include an evaluation of the effects of OCS activities as they relate to authorizing the take of 
marine mammals incidental to oil and gas activities pursuant to the MMPA. Per NEPA 
requirements, the public should have been informed about the expansion of the original EIS 
scope at a minimum, and the lead federal agency should have offered additional scoping 
opportunities to gather comments from the public, affected State and local agencies, and other 
interested stakeholders. This is a significant oversight of the NEPA process. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 78 
Comment Analysis Report 

NEP 7 It is troubling that the DEIS has failed to describe which specific action has triggered the 
NEPA process, explaining only that conceptual ideas of seismic effects from possible OCS 
oil and gas activities are being evaluated. The analysis is not based on reasonably foreseeable 
levels of activity in the Beaufort and Chukchi seas. This vague understanding of conceptual 
ideas would complicate and limit the ability to properly assess environmental impacts and 
provide suitable mitigation. There is no purpose or need for NMFS to prepare a non-
programmatic EIS for future MMPA ITAs that have not been requested. NEPA does not give 
agencies the authority to engage in non-programmatic impact analyses in the absence of a 
proposed action, which is what NMFS has done. 

NEP 8 Although NMFS has stated that the new 2011 DEIS is based on new information becoming 
available, the 2011 DEIS does not appear to define what new information became available 
requiring a change in the scope, set of alternatives, and analysis, as stated in the 2009 NOI to 
withdraw the DPEIS. Although Section 1.7 of the 2011 DEIS lists several NEPA documents 
(most resulting in a finding of no significant impact) prepared subsequent to the withdrawal 
of the DPEIS, NMFS has not clearly defined what new information would drive such a 
significant change to the proposed action and require the radical alternatives analysis 
presented in the 2011 DEIS. 

NEP 9 The NOI for the 2011 DEIS did not specify that the intent of the document was to evaluate 
finite numbers of exploration activities. As stated in the NOI, NMFS prepared the DEIS to 
update the previous 2007 DPEIS based on new information and to include drilling. 
Additionally, the NOI indicated that NMFS’ analysis would rely on evaluating a range of 
impacts resulting from an unrestricted number of programs to no programs. NMFS did not 
analyze an unrestricted range of programs in any of the alternatives. The original scope 
proposed in the NOI does not match what was produced in the DEIS; therefore NMFS has 
performed an incomplete analysis. 

NEP 10 It is discordant that the proposed action for the DEIS would include BOEM actions along 
with NMFS’ issuance of ITAs. Geological and geophysical activities are, by definition, 
limited in scope, duration and impact. These activities do not have the potential to 
significantly affect the environment, and therefore do not require an EIS. 

NEP 11 The structural issues with the DEIS are so significant that NMFS should: 

• Abandon the DEIS and start a new NEPA process, including a new round of scoping, 
development of a new proposed action, development of new alternatives that comply 
with the MMPA, and a revised environmental consequences analysis.; 

• Abandon the DEIS and work in collaboration with BOEM to initiate a new NEPA 
process, and conduct a workshop with industry to develop and analyze a feasible set of 
alternatives; 

• Abandon the EIS process entirely and continue with its past practice of evaluating impact 
of oil and gas activities in the Arctic through project-specific NEPA analyses; or 

• Abandon the EIS and restart the NEPA process when a project has been identified and 
there is need for such analysis. 

NEP 12 The current DEIS process is unnecessary and replicates NEPA analyses that have already 
been performed on Arctic oil and gas exploration activities. There has already been both a 
final and supplemental EIS for Chukchi Sea Lease Sale 193, which adequately addressed 
seismic exploration and other lease activities to which this DEIS is intended to assess. In 
addition, BOEM has prepared NEPA analyses for Shell’s exploration drilling programs and 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 79 
Comment Analysis Report 

will prepare a project specific analysis for all other Arctic OCS exploration programs. As a 
result, the DEIS duplicates and complicates the NEPA process by introducing a competing 
impact assessment to BOEM’s work. 

NEP 13 NMFS should add Cook Inlet to the project area for the EIS, as Cook Inlet is tied into the five 
year OCS Plan. 

NEP 14 As the ultimate measure of potential effects, the impact criteria provided in the DEIS are 
problematic. They do not inform the relevant agencies as to how impacts relate to their 
substantive statutory responsibilities, and they do not provide adequate information as to their 
relationship to the NEPA significance threshold, the MMPA, or OCSLA. The DEIS should 
be revised to reflect these concerns: 

• The DEIS does not articulate thresholds for “significance,” the point at which NEPA 
requires the preparation of an EIS. This is important given the programmatic nature of the 
document, and because there have been conflicting definitions of significance in recent 
NEPA documents related to the Arctic; 

• The DEIS does not provide the necessary information to determine whether any of the 
proposed alternatives will have more than a negligible impact on any marine mammal 
stock, no unmitigable adverse impacts on subsistence uses, and whether there may be 
undue harm to aquatic life. NMFS has previously recommended such an approach to 
BOEM for the Draft Supplemental EIS for lease sale 193. Any impact conclusion in the 
DEIS greater than “negligible” would be in conflict with the MMPA “negligible impact” 
finding. Future site-specific activities will require additional NEPA analysis. 

NEP 15 NMFS should characterize this analysis as a programmatic EIS, and should make clear that 
additional site-specific NEPA analysis must be performed in conjunction to assess individual 
proposed projects and activities. A programmatic EIS, such as the one NMFS has proposed 
here, cannot provide the detailed information required to ensure that specific projects will 
avoid serious environmental harm and will satisfy the standards established by the MMPA. 
For example, it may be necessary to identify with specificity the locations of sensitive 
habitats that may be affected by individual projects in order to develop and implement 
appropriate mitigation measures. The DEIS, as written, cannot achieve this level of detail. 

NEP 16 The DEIS presents an environmental consequences analysis that is inadequate and does not 
provide a basis for assessing the relative merits of the alternatives. 

• The criteria for characterizing impact levels are not clear and do not provide adequate, 
distinct differences between categories. Ratings are given by agency officials, which 
could vary from person to person and yield inconsistent assessments. This methodology 
is in contradiction to the NEPA requirements and guidelines that require objective 
decision-making procedures. 

• A basis for comparison across alternatives, such as a cost-benefit analysis or other 
assessment of relative value between human economic activity and physical/biological 
impacts, is not included. From the existing evaluation system, a “minor” biological effect 
and a “minor” social environment effect would be equivalent. 

• Minor and short-term behavioral effects appear to be judged more consequential than 
known causes of animal mortality. 

• Available technical information on numerous issues does not appear to have been 
evaluated or included in the impact analysis. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 80 
Comment Analysis Report 

• The assumptions for analysis are flawed and substantially underestimates industry 
activities. 

• There is no attention to the probability of impacts. 
• There is little attention paid to the severity of effects discussed. 
• Many conclusions lack supporting data, and findings are not incorporated into a 

biologically meaningful analysis. 

NEP 17 There is no purpose and need for the scope of any NEPA analysis prepared by NMFS to 
address the impacts of incidental take of polar bears and walrus by the oil and gas industry. 
There are existing ITRs and NEPA analyses that cover these species. The scope of the DEIS 
should be revised to exclude polar bears and walrus. 

NEP 18 NMFS should extend the public comment period to accommodate the postponed public 
meetings in Kaktovik and Nuiqsut. It seems appropriate to keep the public comment period 
open for all public entities until public meetings have been completed. NMFS should ensure 
that adherence to the public process and NEPA compliance has occurred. 

NEP 19 The DEIS should define the potential future uses of tiering from the NEPA document, 
specifically related to land and water management and uses. This future management intent 
may extend the regulatory jurisdiction beyond the original scope of the DEIS. 

NEP 20 There are no regulations defining the term “potential effects,” which is used quite frequently 
in the DEIS. Many of these potential effects are questionable due the lack of scientific 
certainty, and in some critical areas, the virtual absence of knowledge. The DEIS confuses 
agency decision-making by presenting an extensive list of “potential effects” as if they are 
certainties -- and then demands they be mitigated. Thus, it is impossible for the DEIS to 
inform, guide or instruct agency managers to differentiate between activities that have no 
effect, minor or major effect to a few animals or to an entire population. 

NEP 21 The DEIS analysis provides inconsistent conclusions between resources and should be 
revised. For example: 

• The analysis appears to give equivalent weight to potential risks for which there is no 
indication of past effect and little to no scientific basis beyond the hypothesis of concern. 
The analysis focuses on de minimus low-level industry acoustic behavioral effects well 
below either NMFS’ existing and precautionary acoustic thresholds and well below levels 
that recent science indicates are legitimate thresholds of harm. These insupportably low 
behavioral effect levels are then labeled as a greater risk ("moderate") than non-industry 
activities involving mortality to marine mammals of concern, which are labeled as 
"minor" environmental effects. 

• Beneficial socioeconomic impacts are characterized as “minor” while environmental 
impacts are characterized as “major.” This level of impact characterization implies an 
inherent judgment of relative value, not supported by environmental economic analysis or 
valuation. 

• The DEIS concedes that because exploration activities can continue for several years, the 
duration of effects on the acoustic environment should be considered “long term,” but 
this overview is absent from the bowhead assessment. 

• In discussing effects to subsistence hunting from permitted discharges, the DEIS refers to 
the section on public health. The summary for the public health effects, however, refers 
to the entirety of the cumulative effects discussion. That section appears to contain no 
more than a passing reference to the issue. The examination of the mitigation measure 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 81 
Comment Analysis Report 

that would require recycling of drilling muds fares no better. The section simply 
reinforces the fact that residents are very concerned about contamination without 
considering the benefits that could come from significantly reducing the volume of toxic 
discharges. 

• The only category with differently rated impacts between Alternatives 3 and 4 is "cultural 
resources." Although authorization of marine mammal incidental take would have no 
impact on cultural resources, for Alternatives 2 and 3, impacts to cultural resources are 
rated as "negligible" rather than none. With imposition of additional mitigation measures 
in Alternative 4, NMFS inexplicably increased the impact to "minor." 

NEP 22 The DEIS fails to explain how the environmental consequences analysis relates single animal 
risk effect to the population level effect analysis and whether the analysis is premised on a 
deterministic versus a probabilistic risk assessment approach. The DEIS apparently relies on 
some type of "hybrid" risk assessment protocol and therefore is condemned to an unscientific 
assessment that leads to an arbitrary and unreasonable conclusion that potential low-level 
behavioral effects on few individual animals would lead to a biologically significant 
population level effect. 

NEP 23 As written, the DEIS impact criteria provide no objective or reproducible scientific basis for 
agency personnel to make decisions. The DEIS process would inherently require agency 
decision makers to make arbitrary decisions not based upon objective boundaries. The DEIS 
impact criteria are hard to differentiate between and should be revised to address the 
following concerns: 

• The distinction made among these categories raises the following questions: What is 
"perceptible" under Low Impact? What does "noticeably alter" mean? How does 
"perceptible" under Low Impact differ from "detectable" under Moderate Impact? What 
separates an "observable change in resource condition" under Moderate Intensity from an 
"observable change in resource condition" under High Impact? Is it proper to establish an 
"observable change" without assessment of the size of the change or more importantly the 
effect as the basis to judge whether an action should be allowable? 

• There is no reproducible scientific process to determine relative judgment about intensity, 
duration, extent, and context. 

NEP 24 The projection of risk in the DEIS is inconsistent with reality of effect. The characterizations 
of risk are highly subjective and fully dependent upon the selection of the evaluator who 
would be authorized to use his/her own, individual scientific understanding, views and biases. 
The assessments cannot be replicated. The DEIS itself acknowledges the inconsistency from 
assessment to assessment. This creates a situation in which the DEIS determines that 
otherwise minor effects from industry operations (ranging from non-detectable to short-term 
behavioral effects with no demonstrated population-level effects) are judged to be a higher 
rated risk to the species than known causes of mortality. 

NEP 25 NMFS and BOEM should examine this process to handle uncertainty and should include in a 
revised DEIS the assumptions and precautionary factors applied that are associated with each 
step of this process such as: 

• estimates of seismic activity; 
• source sizes and characterizations; 
• underwater sound propagation; 
• population estimates and densities of marine mammals; 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 82 
Comment Analysis Report 

• noise exposure criteria; and 
• marine mammal behavior. 

Until the agencies document and communicate these underlying decisions in a transparent 
fashion, neither the industry nor agency resource managers can know and understand how 
such decisions are made and therefore the range and rate of error. The DEIS as presently 
written presents an "on the one hand; on the other" approach which does not inform the issue 
for agency resource managers. 

NEP 26 It is necessary for the DEIS to clearly define what constitutes a “take” and why, and what 
thresholds will be utilized in the rulemaking. If there is reason for differing thresholds, those 
differences should be clearly communicated and their rationale thoroughly explained. The 
DEIS should: 

• NMFS needs to quantify the number of marine mammals that it expects to be taken each 
year under all of the activities under review in the DEIS and provide an overall 
quantification. This is critical to NMFS ensuring that its approval of IHAs will comport 
with the MMPA. 

• Assert that exposure to sound does not equal an incidental taking. 
• Communicate that the 120/160/180 dB thresholds used as the basis of the DEIS analysis 

are inappropriate and not scientifically supportable. 
• Adopt the Southall Criteria (Southall, et al. 2007), which would establish the following 

thresholds: Level A at 198 dB re 1 µPa-rms; Level B at the lowest level of TTS-onset as 
a proxy until better data is developed. 

NEP 27 The DEIS analysis should consider the frequency component, nature of the sound source, 
cetacean hearing sensitivities, and biological significance when determining what constitutes 
Level B incidental take. The working assumption that impulsive noise never disrupts marine 
mammal behavior at levels below 160 dB (RMS), and disrupts behavior with 100 percent 
probability at higher levels has been repeatedly demonstrated to be incorrect, including in 
cases involving the sources and areas being considered in the DEIS. The reliance on the 160 
dB guideline for Level B take estimation is antiquated and should be revised by NMFS. The 
criteria should be replaced by a combination of Sound Exposure Level limits and Peak (not 
RMS) Sound Pressure Levels or other metric being considered. 

NEP 28 The DEIS fails to: 

• Adequately reflect prior research contradicting the Richardson et al. (1999) findings; 
• Address deficiencies in the Richardson et al. (1999) study; and 
• Present and give adequate consideration to newer scientific studies that challenge the 

assertion that bowhead whales commonly deflect around industry sound sources. 

NEP 29 Fundamental legal violations of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), NEPA, and 
OCSLA may have occurred during the review process and appear throughout the DEIS 
document. There are significant NEPA failures in the scoping process, in the consultation 
process with agency experts, in the development and assessment of action alternatives, and in 
the development and assessment of mitigation measures. There are also many assumptions 
and conclusions in the DEIS that are clearly outside of NMFS’ jurisdiction, raise anti-
competitiveness concerns, and are likely in violation of the contract requirements and 
property rights established through the OCSLA. In total, these legal violations create the 
impression that NMFS pre-judged the results of their NEPA analysis. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 83 
Comment Analysis Report 

• NMFS did not evaluate different numbers per sea/alternative of drilling programs, as was 
requested in public comments listed as COR 38 in Appendix C [of the EIS scoping 
report]. 

• The DEIS contains little or no assessment of the impact of alternatives on BOEM’s 
ability to meet the OCSLA requirements for exploration and development, as all of the 
alternatives would slow the pace of exploration and development so much that lease 
terms may be violated and development may not be economically viable. 

• The arbitrary ceiling on exploration and development activities chosen by NMFS raises 
anti-competitiveness concerns. NMFS will be put in the position of picking and choosing 
which lessees will get the opportunity to explore their leases. 

• NMFS’s actions under both NEPA and OCSLA need to be reviewed under the arbitrary 
and capricious standard of the APA. An agency’s decision is arbitrary and capricious 
under the APA where the agency (i) relies on factors Congress did not intend it to 
consider, (ii) entirely fails to consider an important aspect of the problem, or (iii) offers 
an explanation that runs counter to the evidence before the agency or is so implausible 
that it could not be ascribed to a difference in view or the product of agency expertise. 
Lands Council v. McNair, 537 F.3d 981, 987 (9th Cir. 2008) (en banc). The current DEIS 
errs in all three ways. 

NEP 30 The various stages of oil and gas exploration and development are connected actions that 
should have been analyzed in the DEIS. The DEIS analyzes activities independently, but fails 
to account for the temporal progression of exploration toward development on a given 
prospect. By analyzing only a “snapshot” of activity in a given year, the DEIS fails to account 
for the potential bottleneck caused by its forced cap on the activity allowed under its NEPA 
analysis. NMFS should have considered a level of activity that reflected reasonably 
foreseeable lessee demand for authorization to conduct oil and gas exploration and 
development, and because it did not, the DEIS is legally defective and does not meet the 
requirement to provide a reasonably accurate estimate of future activities necessary for the 
DEIS to support subsequent decision-making under OCSLA. 

NEP 31 The DEIS should also include consideration of the additional time required to strike first oil 
under each alternative and mitigation measure, since the delay between exploration 
investment and production revenue has a direct impact on economic viability and, by 
extension, the cumulative socioeconomic impacts of an alternative. 

NEP 32 NMFS should consider writing five-year ITRs for oil and gas exploration activities rather 
than using this DEIS as the NEPA document. 

NEP 33 In order to designate “special habitat areas,” NMFS must go through the proper channels, 
including a full review process. No such process was undertaken prior to designating these 
“special habitat areas” in the DEIS. 

NEP 34 NMFS should consider basing its analysis of bowhead whales on the potential biological 
removal (PBR) – a concept that reflects the best scientific information available and a 
concept that is defined within the MMPA. NMFS could use information from the stock 
assessments, current subsistence harvest quotas, and natural mortality to assess PBR. If 
NMFS does not include PBR as an analysis technique in the DEIS, it should be stated why it 
was not included. 

  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 84 
Comment Analysis Report 

NEP 35 The impact criteria that were used for the magnitude or intensity of impacts for marine 
mammals are not appropriate. For a high intensity activity, whales and other marine 
mammals would have to entirely leave the EIS project area. This criterion is arbitrary and has 
no basis in biology. Instead, the intensity of the impact should relate to animals missing 
feeding opportunities, being deflected from migratory routes, the potential for stress related 
impacts, or other risk factors. 

NEP 36 The DEIS repeatedly asserts, without support, that time and place limitations may not result 
in fewer exploration activities. The DEIS must do more to justify its position. It cannot 
simply assume that desirable locations for exploration activities are fungible enough that a 
restriction on activities in Camden Bay, for example, will lead to more exploration between 
Camden Bay and Harrison Bay. 

NEP 37 NMFS must revise the thresholds and methodology used to estimate take from airgun use to 
incorporate the following parameters: 

• Employ a combination of specific thresholds for which sufficient species-specific data 
are available and generalized thresholds for all other species. These thresholds should be 
expressed as linear risk functions where appropriate. If a risk function is used, the 50% 
take parameter for all the baleen whales (bowhead, fin, humpback, and gray whales) and 
odontocetes occurring in the area (beluga whales, narwhals, killer whales, harbor 
porpoises) should not exceed 140 dB (RMS). Indeed, at least for bowhead whales, beluga 
whales, and harbor porpoises, NMFS should use a threshold well below that number, 
reflecting the high levels of disturbance seen in these species at 120 dB (RMS) and 
below. 

• Data on species for which specific thresholds are developed should be included in 
deriving generalized thresholds for species for which less data are available. 

• In deriving its take thresholds, NMFS should treat airgun arrays as a mixed acoustic type, 
behaving as a multi-pulse source closer to the array and, in effect, as a continuous noise 
source further from the array, per the findings of the 2011 Open Water Panel cited above. 
Take thresholds for the impulsive component of airgun noise should be based on peak 
pressure rather than on RMS. 

• Masking thresholds should be derived from Clark et al. (2009), recognizing that masking 
begins when received levels rise above ambient noise. 

NEP 38 The DEIS fails to consider masking effects in establishing a 120 dB threshold for continuous 
noise sources. Some biologists have analogized the increasing levels of noise from human 
activities as a rising tide of “fog” that is already shrinking the sensory range of marine 
animals by orders of magnitude from pre-industrial levels. As noted above, masking of 
natural sounds begins when received levels rise above ambient noise at relevant frequencies. 
Accordingly, NMFS must evaluate the loss of communication space, and consider the extent 
of acoustic propagation, at far lower received levels than the DEIS currently employs. 

NEP 39 The DEIS fails to consider the impacts of sub-bottom profilers and other active acoustic 
sources commonly featured in deep-penetration seismic and shallow hazard surveys and 
should be included in the final analysis, regardless of the risk function NMFS ultimately uses. 

NEP 40 As the Ninth Circuit has found, “the considerations made relevant by the substantive statute 
during the proposed action must be addressed in NEPA analysis.” Here, in assessing their 
MMPA obligations, the agencies presuppose that industry will apply for IHAs rather than 
five-year take authorizations and that BOEM will not apply to NMFS for programmatic 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 85 
Comment Analysis Report 

rulemaking. But the potential for mortality and serious injury bars industry from using the 
incidental harassment process to obtain take authorizations under the MMPA. 

In 1994, Congress amended the MMPA to add provisions that allow for the incidental 
harassment of marine mammals through IHAs, but only for activities that result the “taking 
by harassment” of marine mammals. For those activities that could result in ‘taking” other 
than harassment, interested parties must continue to use the pre-existing procedures for 
authorization through specific regulations, often referred to as “five-year regulations.” 
Accordingly, NMFS’ implementing regulations state that an IHA in the Arctic cannot be used 
for “activities that have the potential to result in serious injury or mortality.” In the preamble 
to the proposed regulations, NMFS explained that if there is a potential for serious injury or 
death, it must either be “negated” through mitigation requirements or the applicant must 
instead seek approval through five-year regulations. 

Given the clear potential for serious injury and mortality, few if any seismic operators in the 
Arctic can legally obtain their MMPA authorizations through the IHAs process. BOEM 
should consider applying to NMFS for a programmatic take authorization, and NMFS should 
revise its impact and alternatives analyses in the EIS on the assumption that rulemaking is 
required. 

NEP 41 The DEIS contains very little discussion of the combined effects of drilling and ice 
management. Ice management can significantly expand the extent of a disturbance zone. It is 
unclear as to how the disturbance zones for exploratory drilling in the Chukchi Sea were 
determined as well. 

NEP 42 The analysis of impacts under Alternative 3 is insufficient and superficial and shows little 
change from the analysis of impacts under Alternative 2 despite adding four additional 
seismic surveys, four shallow hazard surveys, and two drilling programs. The analysis in 
Alternative 3 highlights the general failure to consider the collective impact of different 
activities. For example, the DEIS notes the minimum separation distance for seismic surveys, 
but no such impediment exists for separating surveying and exploration drilling, along with 
its accompanying ice breaking activities. 

NEP 43 The DEIS references the “limited geographic extent” of ice breaking activities, but it does not 
consistently recognize that multiple ice breakers could operate as a result of the exploration 
drilling programs. 

NEP 44 NEPA regulations make clear that agencies should not proceed with authorizations for 
individual projects until an ongoing programmatic EIS is complete. That limitation is relevant 
to the IHAs application currently before NMFS, including Shell’s plan for exploration 
drilling beginning in 2012. It would be unlawful for NMFS to approve the marine mammal 
harassment associated with Shell’s proposal without completing the EIS. 

NEP 45 The DEIS states that the final document may be used as the “sole” NEPA compliance 
document for future activities. Such an approach is unwarranted. The EIS, as written, does 
not provide sufficient information about the effects of specific activities taking place in any 
particular location in the Arctic. The Ninth Circuit has criticized attempts to rely on a 
programmatic overview to justify projects when there is a lack of “any specific information” 
about cumulative effects. That specificity is missing here as well. For example, Shell’s 
proposed a multi-year exploration drilling program in both seas beginning in 2012 will 
involve ten wells, four ice management vessels, and dozens of support ships. The EIS simply 
does not provide an adequate analysis that captures the effects of the entire enterprise, 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 86 
Comment Analysis Report 

including: 1) the Kulluk’s considerable disturbance zone; 2) the proximity of the drill sites to 
bowhead feeding locations and the number of potentially harassed whales; or 3) the total 
combined effects of drilling, ice management, and vessel traffic. 

NEP 46 The DEIS fails to incorporate impacts consistently and accurately through all layers of the 
food web. A flow chart showing cause-and-effect relationships through each biological layer 
may help correct truncation of analyses between resource groups. The resource 
specialists/authors should coordinate on the analyses, particularly for prey resources or 
habitat parameters. 

NEP 47 NMFS should come back to the communities after comments have been received on the 
DEIS and provide a presentation or summary document that shows how communities' 
comments were incorporated. 

NEP 48 The communities are feeling overwhelmed with the amount of documents they are being 
asked to review related to various aspects of oil and gas exploration and development 
activities. The system of commenting on EIS documents needs to be revised. However, the 
forums of public meetings are important to people in the communities so their concerns can 
be heard before they are implemented in the EIS. 

NEP 49 NMFS should consider making EIS documents (such as the public meeting powerpoint, 
project maps, the mitigation measures, and/or the Executive Summary) available in hard copy 
form to the communities. Even though these documents are on the project website, access to 
the internet is very slow, and not always available and/or reliable. Having information 
available in libraries or repositories would be much better for rural Alaskan residents. 

NEP 50 Deferring the selection of mitigation measures to a later date, where the public may not be 
involved, fails to comport with NEPA’s requirements. “An essential component of a 
reasonably complete mitigation discussion is an assessment of whether the proposed 
mitigation measures can be effective." In reviewing NEPA documents, courts require this 
level of disclosure, because "without at least some evaluation of effectiveness," the 
discussion of mitigation measures is "useless" for "evaluating whether the anticipated 
environmental impacts can be avoided." A "mere listing of mitigation measures is insufficient 
to qualify as the reasoned discussion required by NEPA." The EIS should identify which 
mitigation measures will be used. 

NEP 51 The DEIS provides extensive information regarding potential impacts of industry activities on 
marine life. However, it gives insufficient attention to the impacts the alternatives and 
mitigation measures would have on development of OCS resources. This should include 
information on lost opportunity costs and the effect of time and area closures given the 
already very short open water and weather windows available for Arctic industry operations. 

NEP 52 Positive environmental consequences of some industry activities and technologies are not 
adequately considered, especially alternative technologies and consideration of what the 
benefits of better imaging of the subsurface provides in terms of potentially reducing the 
number of wells to maximize safe production. 

NEP 53 Local city councils within the affected area need to be informed of public involvement 
meetings, since they are the elected representatives for the community. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 87 
Comment Analysis Report 

NEP 54 Either the proposed action for the EIS needs to be changed or the analysis is too broad for the 
proposed action stated. NMFS should not limit the number of activities allowed: 

• As long as the number of takes has no more than a negligible impact on species or stock. 
• Limiting the level of activities also limits the amount of data that can be collected. 

Industry will not be able to collect the best data in the time allotted. 

NEP 55 The exploration drilling season is largely limited by ice. Ice distribution in recent years 
indicates drilling at some lease holdings could possibly occur June-November. NMFS should, 
therefore, extend the temporal extent of the exploration drilling season. 

NEP 56 The planning area boundary south of Point Hope should be removed from the EIS project 
area. This area serves as the primary transportation route from the Bering Straits to the 
Beaufort and Chukchi sea lease holdings. By including this portion of the Chukchi Sea in the 
EIS project area, NMFS appears to be attempting to restrict access to travel corridors during 
key periods. Vessel transit to a lease holding or exploration area is not included in current 
NMFS or BOEM regulatory jurisdiction; therefore, the requirement included in the DEIS 
provides unwarranted restrictions. Transit areas should not be included in the EIS project area 
since ITAs are not required for vessel transit. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 88 
Comment Analysis Report 

Oil Spill Risks (OSR) 
OSR Concerns about potential for oil spill, ability to clean up spills in various conditions, potential 

impacts to resources or environment from spills. 

OSR 1 A large oil spill in the extreme conditions present in Arctic waters would be extremely 
difficult or impossible to clean up. Current cleanup methods are unsuitable and ineffective. 
Oil spill responses need to be developed in advance of offshore development. NMFS and 
BOEM need to consider the following: 

• Current technology only allows rescue and repair attempts during ice free parts of the 
year. If an oil spill occurs near or into freeze-up, the oil will remain trapped there until 
spring. These spring lead systems and melt pools are important areas where wildlife 
collect. 

• How would oil be skimmed with sea ice present? 
• How would rough waters affect oil spill response effectiveness and time, and could rough 

seas and sea ice, in combination, churn the surface oil? 

OSR 2 An oil spill being a low probability event is optimistic and would only apply to the 
exploration phase. Once full development or production goes into effect, an oil spill is more 
likely. Are there any data suggesting this is a low probability? NMFS should assume a spill 
will occur and plan accordingly. 

OSR 3 An oil spill in the arctic environment would be devastating to numerous biological systems, 
habitats, communities and people. There is too little known about Arctic marine wildlife to 
know what the population effects would be. Black (oiled) ice would expedite ice melt. The 
analysis section needs to be updated. Not only would the Arctic be affected but the waters 
surrounding the Arctic as well. 

OSR 4 An Oil Spill Response Gap Analysis needs to be developed for existing Arctic Oil and Gas 
Operations. 

OSR 5 The effects of an oil spill on indigenous peoples located on the Canadian side of the border 
needs to be assessed. 

OSR 6 The use of dispersants could have more unknown effects in the cold and often ice covered 
seas of the Arctic. People are reported to be sick or dead from past use of these dispersants, 
but yet they are still mentioned as methods of cleanup. 

OSR 7 There are many physical effects a spill can have on marine mammals. Thoroughly consider 
the impact of routine spills on marine mammals. The marine mammal commissions briefing 
on the Deepwater Horizon spill listed many. 

OSR 8 Mitigation measures need to reflect the possibility of an oil spill and lead to a least likely 
impact. Identify areas to be protected first in case a spill does occur. 

OSR 9 Pinnipeds and walruses are said to have only minor to moderate impacts with a very large oil 
spill. The conclusion is peculiar since NMFS is considering ringed and bearded seals and 
USFWS is considering walruses to be listed under the ESA. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 89 
Comment Analysis Report 

OSR 10 Proven technology that could operate outside the open-water season should be specified. The 
EIS needs to determine if certain vessels like the drillship Discoverer can actually complete a 
relief-well late in the operating season when ice may be present, since it is not a true ice class 
vessel. 

OSR 11 Hypothetical spill real time constraints and how parameters for past VLOS events need to be 
explained and identified. A range of representative oils should be used for scenarios not just 
for a light-weight oil. Percentages of trajectories need to be explained and identified. 

OSR 12 The oil spill section needs to be reworked. NMFS should consider also working the 
discussion of oil spills in the discussion the alternatives. No overall risks to the environment 
are stated, or severity of spills in different areas, shoreline oiling is inadequate, impacts to 
whales may be of higher magnitude due to important feeding areas and spring lead systems. 
Recovery rates should be reevaluated for spilled oil. There are no site-specific details. The 
trajectory model needs to be more precise. 

OSR 13 The DEIS confirms our [the affected communities] worst fears about both potential negative 
impacts from offshore drilling and the fact that the federal government appears ready to place 
on our communities a completely unacceptable risk at the behest of the international oil 
companies. Native people in Alaska depend on the region for food and economical support. 
An oil spill would negatively impact the local economies and the livelihoods of Native 
people. 

OSR 14 To the extent that a VLOS is not part of the proposed action covered in the DEIS, it is 
inappropriate to include an evaluation of the impacts of such an event in this document 

OSR 15 NMFS should recommend an interagency research program on oil spill response in the Arctic 
and seek appropriations from the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund to carry out the program as 
soon as possible. 

OSR 16 This DEIS should explain how non-Arctic analogs of oil spills are related to the Arctic and 
what criteria are used as well as highlight the USGS Data-Gap Report that recommends for 
continuous updating of estimates. 

OSR 17 Consider that effects of an oil spill would be long-lasting. Petroleum products cause 
malformation in fish, death in marine mammals and birds, and remain in the benthos for at 
least 25 years, so would impact the ecosystem for at least a quarter of a century. 

OSR 18 The effects that a very large oil spill could have on seal populations are understated in the 
analyses. 

• Based on animal behavior and results from the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill (EVOS) it is much 
more likely that seals would be attracted to a spill area particularly cleanup operations, 
leading to a higher chance of oiling (Nelson 1969, Herreman 2011 personal observation). 

• The oil spill would not have to reach polynya or lead systems to affect seals. Ringed seals 
feed under the pack ice in the water column layer where oil would likely be entrained and 
bearded seals travel through this water layer. 

• Numerous individuals are likely to become oiled no matter where such a spill is likely to 
occur. 

• Food sources for all seal species would be heavily impacted in spill areas. 
• More than one "subpopulation" could likely be affected by a very large oil spill. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 90 
Comment Analysis Report 

OSR 19 Analysis should include the high probability for polar bears to be impacted if an oil spill 
reached the lead edge between the shorefast and pack ice zones, which is critical foraging 
habitat especially during spring after den emergence by females with cubs. 

OSR 20 It is recommended that NMFS take into account the safety and environmental concerns 
highlighted in the Gulf of Mexico incident and how these factors will be exacerbated in the 
more physically challenging Arctic environment. Specifically, NMFS is asked to consider the 
systematic safety problems with the oil and gas industry, the current lack of regulatory 
oversight, and the lax enforcement of violations. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 91 
Comment Analysis Report 

Peer Review (PER) 
PER Suggestions for peer review of permits, activities, proposals. 

PER 1 A higher-quality survey effort needs to be conducted by an independent and trusted third 
party. 

PER 2 An open-ended permit should not move into production without proper review of the 
extensive processes, technologies, and infrastructure required for commercial hydrocarbon 
exploitation. 

PER 3 Research and monitoring cannot just be industry controlled; it needs to be a transparent 
process with peer review. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 92 
Comment Analysis Report 

Regulatory Compliance (REG) 
REG Comments associated with compliance with existing regulations, laws and statutes. 

REG 1 NMFS should reconsider the use of the word “taking” in reference to the impacts to marine 
mammals since these animals are not going to be taken, they are going to be killed and 
wasted. 

REG 2 Permitted activity level should not exceed what is absolutely essential for the industry to 
conduct seismic survey activities. NMFS needs to be sure that activities are indeed, negligible 
and at the least practicable level for purposes of the MMPA. 

REG 3 NMFS is encouraged to amend the DEIS to include a more complete description of the 
applicable statute and implementing regulations and analyze whether the proposed levels of 
industrial activity will comply with the substantive standards of the MMPA. 

REG 4 NMFS should revise the DEIS to encompass only those areas that are within the agency’s 
jurisdiction and remove provisions and sections that conflicts with other federal and state 
agency jurisdictions (BOEM, USFWS, EPA, Coast Guard, and State of Alaska). The current 
DEIS is felt to constitute a broad reassessment and expansion of regulatory oversight. 
Comments include: 

• The EIS mandates portions of CAAs, which are voluntary and beyond NMFS 
jurisdiction. 

• The EIS proposes polar bear mitigations measures that could contradict those issued by 
USFWS under the MMPA and ESA. 

• Potential requirements for zero discharge encroach on EPA’s jurisdiction under the Clean 
Water Act regarding whether and how to authorize discharges. 

• Proposed mitigation measures, acoustic restrictions, and “Special Habitat” area 
effectively extend exclusion zones and curtail lease block access, in effect “capping” 
exploration activities. These measures encroach on the Department of the Interior’s 
jurisdiction to identify areas open for leasing and approve exploration plans, as 
designated under OCSLA. 

• The proposed requirement for an Oil Spill Response Plan conflicts with BOEM, Bureau 
of Safety and Environmental Enforcement and the Coast Guard’s jurisdiction, as 
established in OPA-90, which requires spill response planning. 

• NMFS does not have the authority to restrict vessel transit, which is under the jurisdiction 
of the Coast Guard. 

• Proposed restrictions, outcomes, and mitigation measures duplicate and contradict 
existing State lease stipulations and mitigation measures. 

REG 5 NMFS should take a precautionary approach in its analysis of impacts of oil and gas activities 
and in the selection of a preferred alternative. NMFS should not permit any more oil and gas 
exploration within the U.S. Beaufort and Chukchi seas unless and until there is a plan in place 
that shows those activities can be conducted without harming the health of the ecosystem or 
opportunities for the subsistence way of life. 

REG 6 The EIS needs to be revised to ensure compliance with Article 18 of the Vienna Convention 
of the Law on Treaties and the Espoo Convention, which states that a country engaging in 
offshore oil and gas development must take all appropriate and effective measures to prevent, 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 93 
Comment Analysis Report 

reduce and control significant adverse transboundary environmental impacts from proposed 
activities and must notify and provide information to a potentially affected country. 

REG 7 The DEIS needs to identify and properly address the importance of balancing the 
requirements of the OCSLA, the MMPA and ESA. Currently, the DEIS substantially gives 
undue weight to considerations involving incidental taking of marine mammals under the 
MMPA and virtually ignores the requirements of OCSLA. Comments include: 

• The DEIS contains little or no assessment of the impact of alternatives on BOEM’s 
ability to meet the OCSLA requirements for exploration and development. 

• A forced limitation in industry activity by offering only alternatives that constrain 
industry activities would logically result in violating the expeditious development 
provisions of OCSLA. 

• All of the alternatives would slow the pace of exploration and development so much that 
lease terms may be violated and development may not be economically viable. 

REG 8 NMFS’s explicit limitations imposed on future exploration and development on existing 
leases in the DEIS undermine the contractual agreement between lessees and the Federal 
government in violation of the Supreme Court’s instruction in Mobil Oil Exploration & 
Producing Southeast v. United States, 530 U.S. 604 (2000). 

REG 9 The DEIS needs to be changed to reflect the omnibus bill signed by President Obama on 
December 23, 2011 that transfers Clean Air Act permitting authority from the EPA 
Administrator to the Secretary of Interior (BOEM) in Alaska Arctic OCS. 

REG 10 Until there an indication that BOEM intends to adopt new air permitting regulations for the 
Arctic or otherwise adopt regulations that will ensure compliance with the requirements of 
the Clean Air Act, it is important that NMFS address the worst case scenario- offshore oil and 
gas activities proceeding under BOEM's current regulations. 

REG 11 The DEIS needs to discuss threatened violations of substantive environmental laws. In 
analyzing the effects "and their significance" pursuant to 40 C.F.R. Â§ 1502.16, CEQ 
regulations require the agency to consider "whether the action threatens a violation of 
Federal, State, or local law or requirements imposed for the protection of the environment." 

REG 12 The current DEIS impact criteria need to be adjusted to reflect MMPA standards, specifically 
in relation to temporal duration and the geographical extent of impacts. In assessing whether 
the proposed alternatives would comply with the MMPA standards, NMFS must analyze 
impacts to each individual hunt to identify accurately the potential threats to each individual 
community. MMPA standards focuses on each individual harvest for each season and do not 
allow NMFS to expand the geographic and temporal scope of its analysis. MMPA regulations 
define an unmitigable adverse impact as one that is "likely to reduce the availability of the 
species to a level insufficient for a harvest to meet subsistence needs." Within the DEIS, the 
current impact criteria would tend to mask impacts to local communities over shorter 
durations of time. 

REG 13 Language needs to be changed throughout the conclusion of impacts to subsistence, where 
NMFS repeatedly discusses the impacts using qualified language; however, the MMPA 
requires a specific finding that the proposed activities "will not" have an adverse impact to 
our subsistence practices. It is asked that NMFS implement the will of Congress and disclose 
whether it has adequate information to reach these required findings before issuing ITAs. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 94 
Comment Analysis Report 

REG 14 It is suggested that NMFS include in the DEIS an explicit discussion of whether and to what 
extent the options available for mitigation comply with the "lease practicable adverse impact" 
standard of the MMPA. This is particularly important for the "additional mitigation 
measures" that NMFS has, to this point, deferred for future consideration. By focusing its 
analysis on the requirements of MMPA, we believe that NMFS will recognize its obligation 
to make an upfront determination of whether these additional mitigation measures are 
necessary to comply with the law. Deferring the selection of mitigation measures to a later 
date, where the public may not be involved, fails to comport with NEPA's requirements. 

REG 15 The DEIS needs to consistently apply section 1502.22 and consider NMFS and BOEM’s 
previous conclusions as to their inability to make informed decisions as to potential effects. 
NMFS acknowledges information gaps without applying the CEQ framework and disregards 
multiple sources that highlight additional fundamental data gaps concerning the Arctic and 
the effects of oil and gas disturbance. 

REG 16 NMFS needs to reassess the legal uncertainty and risks associated with issuing marine 
mammal take authorizations under the MMPA based upon a scope as broad as the Arctic 
Ocean. 

REG 17 NMFS needs to assess the impact of offshore coastal development in light of the fact that 
Alaska lacks a coastal management program, since the State lacks the program infrastructure 
to effectively work on coastal development issues. 

REG 18 NMFS needs to ensure that it is in compliance with the Ninth Circuit court ruling that when 
an action is taken pursuant to a specific statute, not only do the statutory objectives of the 
project serve as a guide by which to determine the reasonableness of objectives outlined in an 
EIS, but the statutory objectives underlying the agency’s action work significantly to define 
its analytic obligations. As a result, NMFS is required by NEPA to explain how alternatives 
in an EIS will meet requirements of other environmental laws and policies. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 95 
Comment Analysis Report 

Research, Monitoring, Evaluation Needs (RME) 
RME Comments on baseline research, monitoring, and evaluation needs 

RME 1 The USGS identified important gaps in existing information related to the Beaufort and 
Chukchi seas, including gaps on the effects of noise on marine mammals. This report 
highlighted that the type of information needed to make decisions about the impact of 
offshore activity (e.g., seismic noise) on marine mammals remains largely lacking. A 
significant unknown is the degree to which sound impacts marine mammals, from the 
individual level to the population level. 

The degree of uncertainty regarding impacts to marine mammals greatly handicaps the 
agencies' efforts to fully evaluate the impacts of the permitted activities, and NMFS' ability to 
determine whether the activity is in compliance with the terms of the MMPA. The agency 
should acknowledge these data-gaps required by applicable NEPA regulations (40 C.F.R. 
§1502.22), and gather the missing information. 

While research and monitoring for marine mammals in the Arctic has increased, NMFS still 
lacks basic information on abundance, trends, and stock structure of most Arctic marine 
mammal species. This information is needed to gauge whether observed local or regional 
effects on individuals or groups of marine mammals are likely to have a cumulative or 
population level effect. 

The lack of information about marine mammals in the Arctic and potential impacts of 
anthropogenic noise, oil spills, pollution and other impacts on those marine mammals 
undercuts NMFS ability to determine the overall effects of such activities. 

RME 2 The DEIS does not address or acknowledge the increasingly well-documented gaps in 
knowledge of baseline environmental conditions and data that is incomplete in the Beaufort 
and Chukchi seas for marine mammals and fish, nor how baseline conditions and marine 
mammal populations are being affected by climate change. Information regarding 
information regarding the composition, distribution, status, ecology of the living marine 
resources and sensitive habitats in these ecosystems needs to be better known. Baseline data 
are also critical to developing appropriate mitigation measures and evaluating their 
effectiveness. It is unclear what decisions over what period of time would be covered under 
the DEIS or how information gaps would be addressed and new information incorporated into 
future decisions. The information gaps in many areas with relatively new and expanding 
exploration activities are extensive and severe enough that it may be too difficult for 
regulators to reach scientifically reliable conclusions about the risks to marine mammals from 
oil and gas activities. 

To complicate matters, much of the baseline data about individual species (e.g., population 
dynamics) remains a noteworthy gap. It is this incomplete baseline that NMFS uses as their 
basis for comparing the potential impacts of each alternative. 

RME 3 Prior to installation and erection, noises from industry equipment need to be tested: 

• Jack-up drilling platforms have not been evaluated in peer reviewed literature and will 
need to be evaluated prior to authorizing the use of this technology under this EIS. The 
DEIS states that it is assumed that the first time a jack-up rig is in operation in the Arctic, 
detailed measurements will be conducted to determine the acoustic characteristics. This 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 96 
Comment Analysis Report 

statement implies an assumption that the noise levels found on erecting the jack-up rig 
will be below levels required for mitigation. The DEIS needs to explain what would be 
the procedure if the noise exposure threshold was exceeded. It is suggest that the noises 
of erecting a jack-up rig be characterized in a trial basis before deployment to a remote 
location where the environment is more sensitive to disruption and where the phrase 
“practical mitigation” can be applied. 

• Noise from the erection and deployment of jack-up rigs and other stationary platforms 
need to be quantified and qualified prior to introducing them into the Arctic. 

• Noise from thruster-driven dynamic positioning systems on drilling platforms and drill 
ships need to be quantified and qualified prior to introducing them into the Arctic. 

RME 4 Propagation of airgun noise from in-ice seismic surveys is not accurately known, 
complicating mitigation threshold distances and procedures. 

RME 5 Noise impacts of heavy transport aircraft and helicopters needs to be evaluated and 
incorporated into the DEIS. 

RME 6 Protection of acoustic environments relies upon accurate reference conditions and that 
requires the development of procedures for measuring the source contributions of noise as 
well as analyses of historical patterns of noise exposure in a particular region. Even studies 
implemented at this very moment will not be entirely accurate since shipping traffic has 
already begun taking advantage of newly ice-free routes. The Arctic is likely the last place on 
the planet where acoustic habitat baseline information can be gathered and doing so is 
imperative to understanding the resulting habitat loss from these activities. A comprehensive 
inventory of acoustical conditions would be the first step towards documenting the extent of 
current noise conditions, and estimating the pristine historic and desired future conditions. 

Analysis of potential impacts at this stage is speculative at best because of the lack of 
definitive information regarding sound source levels, the type and duration of proposed 
exploration activities, and the mitigation measures that each operator would be required to 
meet. However, before an ITA can be issued, NMFS will need such information to make the 
findings required under the MMPA. 

RME 7 Information on Page 4-355, Section 4.9.4.9 Volume of Oil Reaching Shore includes some 
older references to research work that was done in the 1980's and 1990's. More recent 
research or reports based on the Deepwater Horizon incident could be referenced here. In 
addition NMFS and BOEM should consider a deferral on exploration drilling until the 
concerns detailed by the U.S. Oil Spill Commission are adequately addressed. 

RME 8 The DEIS does not explain why obtaining data quality or environmental information on 
alternative technologies would have been exorbitant. 

RME 9 It was recommended that agencies and industry involved in Arctic oil and gas exploration 
establish a research fund to reduce source levels in seismic surveys. New techniques 
including vibroseis should be considered particularly in areas where there have not been 
previous surveys and so comparability with earlier data is not an issue. Likewise, similar to 
their vessel-quieting technology workshops, NOAA is encouraged to fund and facilitate 
expanded research and development in noise reduction measures for seismic surveys. 

RME 10 NMFS has provided only conceptual examples of the temporal and spatial distribution of 
proposed activities under each alternative, and the maps and figures provided do not include 
all possible activities considered for each alternative or how these activities might overlap 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 97 
Comment Analysis Report 

spatially and temporally. The lack of specific information precludes a full assessment of the 
potential effects of the combined activities, including such things as an estimation of the 
number of takes for species that transit through the action area during the timeframe being 
considered. Similarly, the range of airgun volumes, source levels, and distances to the 190-, 
180-, 160-, and 120-dB re 1 µPa harassment thresholds (Table 4.5- 10, which are based on 
measurements from past surveys) vary markedly and cannot be used to determine with any 
confidence the full extent of harassment of marine mammals. Such assessment requires 
modeling of site-specific operational and environmental parameters, which is simply not 
possible based on the information in this programmatic assessment. 

To assess the effects of the proposed oil and gas exploration activities under the MMPA, 
NMFS should work with BOEM estimate the site-specific acoustic footprints for each sound 
threshold (i.e., 190, 180, 160, and 120 dB re 1 µPa) and the expected number of marine 
mammal takes, accounting for all types of sound sources and their cumulative impacts. 

Any analysis of potential impacts at this stage is speculative at best because of the lack of 
definitive information regarding sound source levels, the type and duration of proposed 
exploration activities, and the mitigation measures that each operator would be required to 
meet. However, before an ITA can be issued, NMFS will need such information to make the 
findings required under the MMPA. 

RME 11 There is missing information regarding: 

• Whether enough is known about beluga whales and their habitat use to accurately predict 
the degree of harm expected from multiple years of exploration activity. 

• Issues relevant to effects on walrus regarding the extent of the missing information are 
vast, as well summarized in the USGS Report. Information gaps include: population size; 
stock structure; foraging ecology in relation to prey distributions and oceanography; 
relationship of changes in sea ice to distribution, movements, reproduction, and survival; 
models to predict the effects of climate change and anthropogenic impacts; and improved 
estimates of harvest. Impacts to walrus of changes in Arctic and subarctic ice dynamics 
are not well understood. 

RME 12 To predict the expected effects of oil and gas and other activities more accurately, a broader 
synthesis and integration of available information on bowhead whales and other marine 
mammals is needed. That synthesis should incorporate such factors as ambient sound levels, 
natural and anthropogenic sound sources, abundance, movement patterns, the oceanographic 
features that influence feeding and reproductive behavior, and traditional knowledge 
(Hutchinson and Ferrero 2011). 

RME 13 An ecosystem-wide, integrated synthesis of available information would help identify 
important data gaps that exist for Arctic marine mammals, particularly for lesser-studied 
species such as beluga whales, walruses, and ice seals. It also would help the agencies better 
understand and predict the long-term, cumulative effects of the proposed activities, in light of 
increasing human activities in the Arctic and changing climatic conditions. It is recommended 
that NMFS work with BOEM and other entities as appropriate to establish and fully support 
programs designed to collect and synthesize the relevant scientific information and traditional 
knowledge necessary to evaluate and predict the long-term and cumulative effects of oil and 
gas activities on Arctic marine mammals and their environment. 

Robust monitoring plans for authorized activities could be a key component to filling some of 
these gaps. Not only do these monitoring plans need to be implemented, but all data collected 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 98 
Comment Analysis Report 

should be publically available for peer review and analysis. In the current system, there is no 
choice but to accept industries' interpretation of results. This is not appropriate when we are 
talking about impacts to the public and its resources. Since industry is exploring for oil and 
gas that belongs to the people of the US and they are potentially impacting other resources 
that also belong to the people of the US, data from monitoring programs should be available 
to the public. 

RME 14 Page 4-516 Section 4.10.5.4.4 the DEIS suggests that marine mammals may have trouble 
navigating between seismic surveys and drill operations because of overlapping sound 
signatures, but the analysis does not provide any distances or data to support this conclusion. 

RME 15 Page 4-98 Bowhead Whales, Direct and Indirect Effects [Behavioral Disturbance]. This 
section on bowhead whales does not include more recent data in the actual analysis of the 
impacts though it does occasionally mention some of the work. Rather it falls back to 
previous analyses that did not have this work to draw upon and makes similar conclusions. 
NMFS makes statements that are conjectural to justify its conclusions and not based on most 
recent available data. 

RME 16 It has become painfully obvious that the use of received level alone is seriously limited in 
terms of reliably predicting impacts of sound exposure. However, if NMFS intends to 
continue to define takes accordingly, a more representative probabilistic approach would be 
more defensible. A risk function with a 50 percent midpoint at 140 dB (RMS) that accounts, 
even qualitatively, for contextual issues likely affecting response probability, comes much 
closer to reflecting the existing data for marine mammals, including those in the Arctic, than 
the 160 dB (RMS) step-function that has previously been used and is again relied upon in the 
Arctic DEIS. 

RME 17 Page 3-68, Section 3.2.2.3.2 - The Cryopelagic Assemblage: The sentence "The arctic cod is 
abundant in the region, and their enormous autumn-winter pre spawning swarms are well 
known" is misleading. What is the referenced region? There are no well-known pre-spawning 
swarms for the Beaufort and Chukchi seas oil and gas leasing areas. Furthermore large 
aggregations of Arctic Cod have not been common in the most recent fish surveys conducted 
in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas (same references used in this EIS). 

RME 18 Page 400, 3rd paragraph Section 4.5.2.4.9.1. The middle of this paragraph states that 
"behavioral responses of bowhead whales to activities are expected to be temporary." There 
are no data to support this conclusion. The duration of impacts from industrial activities to 
bowhead whales is unknown. This statement should clearly state the limitations in data. If a 
conclusion is made without data, more information is needed about how NMFS reached this 
conclusion. 

RME 19 Page 4-102, 2nd paragraph, Section 4.5.2.4.9.1. Direct and Indirect Effects, Site Clearance 
and High Resolution Shallow Hazards Survey Programs: A discussion about how bowhead 
whales respond to site clearance/shallow hazard surveys occurs in this paragraph but 
references only Richardson et al. (1985). Given the number of recent site clearance/shallow 
hazard surveys, there should be additional information to be available from surveys 
conducted since 2007. If there are not more recent data, this raises questions regarding the 
failure of monitoring programs to examine effects to bowhead whales from site 
clearance/shallow hazard surveys. 

  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 99 
Comment Analysis Report 

RME 20 Page 4-104, 1st paragraph, 1st sentence, Section 4.5.2.4.9.1 Direct and Indirect Effects, 
Exploratory Drilling: The conclusions based on the impact criteria are not supported by data. 
For example, there are no data on the duration of impacts to bowhead whales from 
exploratory drilling. If NMFS is going to make conclusions, they should highlight that 
conclusions are not based on data but on supposition. 

RME 21 Page 4-104, Section 4.5.2.4.9.1 Direct and Indirect Effects, Associated Vessels and Aircraft: 
This section does not use the best available science. A considerable effort has occurred to 
evaluate impacts from activities associated with BP's Northstar production island. Those 
studies showed that resupply vessels were one of the noisiest activities at Northstar and that 
anthropogenic sounds caused bowhead whales to deflect north of the island or to change 
calling behavior. This EIS should provide that best available information about how bowhead 
whales respond to vessel traffic to the public and decision makers. 

RME 22 Page 4-107, Section 4.5.2.4.9.1 Direct and Indirect Effects, Hearing Impairment, Injury, and 
Mortality: The sentence states that hearing impairment, injury or mortality is "highly 
unlikely." Please confirm if there are data to support this statement. It is understood that there 
are no data about hearing impairment in bowhead or beluga whales. Again, if speculation or 
supposition is used to make conclusions, this should be clearly stated. 

RME 23 The DEIS contains a number of instances in which it acknowledges major information gaps 
related to marine mammals but insists that there is an adequate basis for making an 
assessment of impacts. For example, the DEIS finds that it is not known whether impulsive 
sounds affect reproductive rate or distribution and habitat use [of bowhead whales] over 
periods of days or years. Moreover, the potential for increased stress, and the long-term 
effects of stress, are unknown, as research on stress effects in marine mammals is limited. 
Nevertheless, the DEIS concludes that for bowhead whales the level of available information 
is sufficient to support sound scientific judgments and reasoned managerial decisions, even in 
the absence of additional data of this type. The DEIS also maintains that sufficient 
information exists to evaluate impacts on walrus and polar bear despite uncertainties about 
their populations. 

RME 24 Although the DEIS takes note of some of the missing information related to the effects of 
noise on fish, it maintains that what does exist is sufficient to make an informed decision. 
BOEM’s original draft supplemental EIS for Lease Sale 193, however, observed that 
experiments conducted to date have not contained adequate controls to allow us to predict the 
nature of the change or that any change would occur. NOAA subsequently submitted 
comments noting that BOEM’s admission indicated that the next step would be to address 
whether the cost to obtain the information is exorbitant, or the means of doing so unclear. 

The DEIS also acknowledges that robust population estimates and treads for marine fish are 
unavailable and detailed information concerning their distribution is lacking. Yet the DEIS 
asserts that [g]eneral population trends and life histories are sufficiently understood to 
conclude that impacts on fish resources would be negligible. As recently as 2007, BOEM 
expressed stronger concerns when assessing the effects of a specific proposal for two 
drillships operating in the Beaufort Sea. It found that it could not concur that the effects on all 
fish species would be short term or that these potential effects are insignificant, nor would 
they be limited to the localized displacement of fish, because they could persist for up to five 
months each year for three consecutive years and they could occur during critical times in the 
life cycle of important fish species. The agencies’ prior conclusions are equally applicable in 
the context of this DEIS. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 100 
Comment Analysis Report 

Fish and EFH Impacts Analysis (Direct and Indirect; Alternatives 2 through 5) is 
substantively incomplete and considered to be unsupported analysis lacking analytical rigor 
and depth; conclusions are often not rationally and effectively supported by data; some 
statements are simply false and can be demonstrated so with further analysis of available 
data, studies, and a plethora of broad data gaps that include data gaps concerning the 
distribution, population abundance, and life history statistics for the various arctic fish 
species. 

RME 25 Significant threshold discussion should be expanded based on MMS, Shell Offshore Inc. 
Beaufort Sea Exploration Plan, Environmental Assessment, OCS EIS/EA MMS 2007-009 at 
50-51 (Feb. 2007) (2007 Drilling EA), available at 
http://www.alaska.boemre.gov/ref/EIS%20EA/ShellOffshoreInc_EA/SOI_ea.pdf. 

BOEM avoided looking more closely at the issue by resting on a significance threshold that 
required effects to extend beyond multiple generations. The issue of an appropriate 
significance threshold in the DEIS is discussed in the text. A panel of the Ninth Circuit 
determined that the uncertainty required BOEM to obtain the missing information or provide 
a convincing statement of its conclusion of no significant impacts notwithstanding the 
uncertainty. Alaska Wilderness League v. Salazar, 548 F.3d 815, 831 (9th Cir. 2008), opinion 
withdrawn, 559 F.3d 916 (9th Cir. Mar 06, 2009), vacated as moot, 571 F.3d 859 (9th Cir. 
2009). 

RME 26 The DEIS reveals in many instances that studies are in fact already underway, indicating that 
the necessary information gathering is not cost prohibitive. 

• A study undertaken by BP, the North Slope Borough, and the University of California 
will help better understand masking and the effects of masking on marine mammals[.] It 
will also address ways to overcome the inherent uncertainty of where and when animals 
may be exposed to anthropogenic noise by developing a model for migrating bowhead 
whales. 

• NOAA has convened working groups on Underwater Sound mapping and Cetacean 
Mapping in the Arctic. 

• BOEM has an Environmental Studies Program that includes a number of ongoing and 
proposed studies in the Beaufort and Chukchi seas that are intended to address a wide-
variety of issues relevant to the DEIS. 

• NMFS’s habitat mapping workshop is scheduled to release information this year, and the 
Chukchi Sea Acoustics, Oceanography, and Zooplankton study is well underway. 

These and other studies emphasize the evolving nature of information available concerning 
the Arctic. As part of the EIS, NMFS should establish a plan for continuing to gather 
information. As these and other future studies identify new areas that merit special 
management, the EIS should have a clearly defined process that would allow for their 
addition. 

RME 27 The DEIS’ use of the Conoco permit is also improper because the DEIS failed to 
acknowledge all of Conoco’s emissions and potential impacts. The DEIS purports to include 
a list of typical equipment for an Arctic oil and gas survey or exploratory drilling. The list set 
forth in the DEIS is conspicuously incomplete, however, as it assumes that exploratory 
drilling can be conducted using only a single icebreaker. Conoco’s proposed operations were 
expected to necessitate two icebreakers. Indeed, the three other OCS air permits issued in 
2011 also indicate the need for two icebreakers. The failure of the DEIS to account for the 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 101 
Comment Analysis Report 

use of two icebreakers in each exploratory drilling operations is significant because the 
icebreakers are the largest source of air pollution associated with an exploratory drilling 
operation in the Arctic. 

RME 28 Recent regulatory decisions cutting the annual exploratory drilling window by one third, 
purportedly to temporally expand the oil spill response window during the open water season. 
At the least, the agencies should collect the necessary data by canvassing lessees as to what 
their exploration schedules are, instead of guessing or erroneously assuming what that level 
of activity might be over the five years covered by the EIS. This is an outstanding example of 
not having basic information (e.g., lessee planned activity schedules) necessary even though 
such information is available (upon request) to assess environmental impacts. Such 
information can be and should be obtained (at negligible cost) by the federal government, and 
used to generate accurate assumptions for analysis. Sharing activity plans/schedules are also 
the best of interest of lessees so as to expedite the completion of the EIS and subsequent 
issuance of permits. NMFS and BOEM should also canvas seismic survey companies to 
gather information concerning their interest and schedules of conducting procured or 
speculative seismic surveys in the region and include such data in the generation of their 
assumptions for analysis. 

RME 29 Throughout the DEIS, there are additional acknowledgements of missing information, but 
without any specific findings as to the importance to the agencies’ decision making, as 
required by Section 1502.22, including: 

• Foraging movements of pack-ice breeding seals are not known. 
• There are limited data as to the effects of masking. The greatest limiting factor in 

estimating impacts of masking is a lack of understanding of the spatial and temporal 
scales over which marine mammals actually communicate. 

• It is not known whether impulsive noises affect marine mammal reproductive rate or 
distribution. 

• It is not currently possible to predict which behavioral responses to anthropogenic noise 
might result in significant population consequences for marine mammals, such as 
bowhead whales, in the future. 

• The potential long-term effects on beluga whales from repeated disturbance are unknown. 
Moreover, the current population trend of the Beaufort Sea stock of beluga whales is 
unknown. 

• The degree to which ramp-up protects marine mammals from exposure to intense noises 
is unknown. 

• Chemical response techniques to address an oil spill, such as dispersants could result in 
additional degradation of water quality, which may or may not offset the benefits of 
dispersant use. 

• There is no way to tell what may or may not affect marine mammals in Russian, U.S., or 
in Canadian waters. 

RME 30 As noted throughout these comments, the extent of missing information in the Arctic is 
daunting, and this holds equally true for bowhead whales, including: 

• The long-term effects of disturbance on bowhead whales are unknown. 
• The potential for increased stress is unknown, and it is unknown whether impulsive 

sounds affect the reproductive rate or distribution and habitat use over a period of days or 
years. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 102 
Comment Analysis Report 

• Although there are some data indicting specific habitat use in the Beaufort Sea, 
information is especially lacking to determine where bowhead aggregations occur in the 
Chukchi Sea. 

• What is known about the sensitivity of bowhead whales to sound and disturbance 
indicates that the zones of influence for a single year that included as many as twenty-one 
surveys, four drillships, and dozens of support vessels “including ice management 
vessels” would be considerable and almost certainly include important habitat areas. The 
assumption that the resulting effects over five years would be no more than moderate is 
unsupported. 

RME 31 There is too little information known about the existing biological conditions in the Arctic, 
especially in light of changes wrought by climate change, to be able to reasonably 
understand, evaluate and address the cumulative, adverse impacts of oil and gas activities on 
those arctic ice environments including: 

• Scientific literature emphasizes the need to ensure that the resiliency of ecosystems is 
maintained in light of the changing environmental conditions associated with climate 
change. Uncertainties exist on topics for which more science focus is required, including 
physical parameters, such as storm frequency and intensity, and circulation patterns, and 
species response to environmental changes. 

• There is little information on the potential for additional stresses brought by oil and gas 
activity and increased shipping and tourism and how these potential stressors may 
magnify the impacts associated with changing climate and shrinking sea ice habitats. 
There are more studies that need to be done on invasive species, black carbon, aggregate 
noise. 

• It was noted that a majority of the studies available have been conducted during the 
summer and there is limited data about the wintertime when there is seven to eight 
months of ice on the oceans. 

RME 32 Oil and gas activities in the Arctic Ocean should not be expanded until there is adequate 
information available both from western science and local and traditional knowledge to 
adequately assess potential impacts and make informed decisions. 

RME 33 The DEIS consistently fails to use new information as part of the impact analysis instead 
relying on previous analyses from other NMFS or MMS EIS documents conducted without 
the benefit of the new data. There are a number of instances in this DEIS where NMFS 
recognizes the lack of relevant data or instances where conclusions are drawn without 
supporting data. 

RME 34 In the case of seismic surveys, improvements to analysis and processing methods would 
allow for the use of less powerful survey sources reducing the number of air-gun blasts. 
Better planning and coordination of surveys along with data sharing will help to reduce the 
number and lengths of surveys by avoiding duplication and minimizing survey noise. 
Requirements should be set in place for data collection, presence of adequate marine mammal 
observers, and use of PAM to avoid surveys when and where marine mammals are present. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 103 
Comment Analysis Report 

RME 35 NMFS should make full use of the best scientific information and assessment methodologies, 
and rigorously analyze impacts to the physical, biological, and subsistence resources 
identified in the DEIS. Steps should be taken to: 

• Move away from arbitrary economic, political or geographic boundaries and instead 
incorporate the latest science to address how changes in one area or species affect 
another. 

• Develop long-term, precautionary, science-based planning that acknowledges the 
complexity, importance, remoteness and fragility of America’s Arctic region. The 
interconnected nature of Arctic marine ecosystems demands a more holistic approach to 
examining the overall health of the Arctic and assessing the risks and impacts associated 
with offshore oil and gas activities in the region. 

• NMFS should carefully scrutinize the impacts analysis for data deficiencies, as well as 
statements conflicting with available scientific studies. 

It is impossible to know what the effects would be on species without more information or to 
determine mitigation measures on species without any effectiveness of said measures without 
first knowing what the impacts would be. 

RME 36 There is not enough information known about the marine habitat on the Chukchi Sea side of 
the EIS project area. Modeling that takes places only has a small census of data, which does 
not provide adequate results of what impacts could be. The EIS should reflect this difference 
between the Beaufort Sea and the Chukchi Sea. 

RME 37 At present the ambient noise budgets are not very well known in the Arctic, but the USGS 
indicated that this type of data were needed for scientists to understand the magnitude and 
significance of potential effects of anthropogenic sound on marine mammals. Noise impacts 
on marine mammals from underwater acoustic communication systems needs to be evaluated 
and incorporated into the DEIS. 

The USGS' recommendation to develop an inventory/database of seismic sound sources used 
in the Arctic would be a good first step toward a better understanding of long-term, 
population-level effects of seismic and drilling activities. Two recent projects that will help 
further such an integrated approach are NOAA’s recently launched Synthesis of Arctic 
Research (SOAR) and the North Pacific Marine Research Institute’s industry-supported 
synthesis of existing scientific and traditional knowledge of Bering Strait and Arctic Ocean 
marine ecosystem information. 

RME 38 G&G activities in the Arctic must be accompanied by a parallel research effort that improves 
understanding of ecosystem dynamics and the key ecological attributes that support polar 
bears, walrus, ice seals and other ice-dependent species. NMFS, as the agency with principal 
responsibility for marine mammals, should acknowledge that any understanding of 
cumulative effects is hampered by the need for better information. NMFS should 
acknowledge the need for additional research and monitoring coupled with long-term species 
monitoring programs supported by industry funding, and research must be incorporated into a 
rapid review process for management on an ongoing basis. By allowing the science and 
technology to develop, more concrete feasible and effective mitigation strategies can be 
provided which in turn would benefit energy security and proper wildlife protections. 

Identification of important ecological areas should be an ongoing part of an integrated, long-
term scientific research and monitoring program for the Arctic, not a static, one-time event. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 104 
Comment Analysis Report 

As an Arctic research and monitoring program gives us a greater understanding of the 
ecological functioning of Arctic waters, it may reveal additional important ecological areas 
that BOEM and NMFS should exclude from future lease sales and other oil and gas activities. 

RME 39 Over the last several years, the scientific community has identified a number of pathways by 
which anthropogenic noise can affect vital rates and populations of animals. These efforts 
include the 2005 National Research Council study, which produced a model for the 
Population Consequences of Acoustic Disturbance; an ongoing Office of Naval Research 
program whose first phase has advanced the NRC model; and the 2009 Okeanos workshop on 
cumulative impacts. The DEIS employs none of these methods, and hardly refers to any 
biological pathway of impact. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 105 
Comment Analysis Report 

Socioeconomic Impacts (SEI) 
SEI Comments on economic impacts to local communities, regional economy, and national 

economy, can include changes in the social or economic environments. 

SEI 1 The analysis of socioeconomic impacts in the DEIS is inadequate. Comments include: 

• The analysis claims inaccurately many impacts are unknown or cannot be predicted and 
fails to consider the full potential of unrealized employment, payroll, government 
revenue, and other benefits of exploration and development, as well as the effectiveness 
of local hire efforts. 

• The analysis is inappropriately limited in a manner not consistent with the analysis of 
other impacts in the DEIS. Potential beneficial impacts from development should not be 
considered “temporary” and economic impacts should not be considered “minor”. This 
characterization is inconsistent with the use of these same terms for environmental 
impacts analysis. 

• NMFS did not provide a complete evaluation of the socioeconomic impacts of instituting 
the additional mitigation measures. 

• The projected increase in employment appears to be low; 
• The forecasts for future activity in the DEIS scope of alternatives, if based on historical 

activity, appear to ignore the impact of economic forces, especially resource value as 
impacted by current and future market prices. Historical exploration activity in the 
Chukchi and Beaufort OCS in the 1980s and early 1990s declined and ceased due to low 
oil price rather than absence of resource; 

• Positive benefits were not captured adequately. 

SEI 2 The DEIS will compromise the economic feasibility of developing oil and gas in the Alaska 
OCS. Specific issues include: 

• It would also adversely impact the ability of regional corporations to meet the obligations 
imposed upon them by Congress with regard to their shareholders; 

• Development will not go forward if exploration is not allowed or is rendered impractical 
and investors may dismiss Alaska’s future potential for offshore oil and gas exploration, 
further limiting the state’s economic future; 

• The limited alternatives considered would significantly increase the length of time 
required to explore and appraise hydrocarbon resources. 

SEI 3 The federal leaseholders, the State of Alaska, the NSB, the northern Alaskan communities, 
and onshore and offshore operators will experience greatly reduced economic and resources 
exploration and development opportunities as a result of the restricted number of programs 
identified in the DEIS. The resulting long-term effects of restricting exploration and 
subsequent development will negatively impact the economy of Alaska. 

SEI 4 An Economic Impact Study should be conducted on the subsistence economies, the human 
health adverse and cumulative and aggregate impacts, and climate change impacts to the 
economies of the coastal communities of Alaska. 

  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 106 
Comment Analysis Report 

SEI 5 The potential long-term benefits of exploration outweigh any adverse impacts. These short 
and long-term positive impacts of increased revenue, business opportunity, and oil and gas 
availability are not fully considered in the DEIS, and represents a biased interpretation. The 
characterization of potential beneficial impacts from development over 50 years should not 
be considered “temporary” and 55,000 jobs with a $145 billion payroll should not be 
considered “minor.” 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 107 
Comment Analysis Report 

Subsistence Resource Protection (SRP) 
SRP Comments on need to protect subsistence resources and potential impacts to these resources. 

SRP 1 The DEIS is lacking in an in-depth analysis of impacts to subsistence. NMFS should analyze 
the following in more detail: 

• Effects of oil and gas activities on subsistence resources and how climate change could 
make species even more vulnerable to those effects; 

• The discussion of subsistence in the section on oil spills; 
• Long-term impacts to communities from loss of our whale hunting tradition; 
• Impacts on subsistence hunting that occur outside the project area, for example, in the 

Canadian portion of the Beaufort Sea; 
• Impacts associated with multiple authorizations taking place over multiple years. 

SRP 2 Subsistence hunters are affected by industrial activities in ways that do not strictly correlate 
to the health of marine mammal populations, such as when marine mammals deflect away 
from exploration activities, hunting opportunities may be lost regardless of whether or not the 
deflection harms the species as a whole. 

SRP 3 Many people depend on the Beaufort and Chukchi seas for subsistence resources. Protection 
of these resources is important to sustaining food sources, nutrition, athletics, and the culture 
of Alaskan Natives for future generations. The EIS needs to consider not only subsistence 
resources, but the food, prey, and habitat of those resources in its analysis of impacts. 

SRP 4 Industrial activities adversely affect subsistence resources, resulting in negative impacts that 
could decrease food security and encourage consumption of store-bought foods with less 
nutritional value. 

SRP 5 NMFS should use the information acquired on subsistence hunting grounds and provide real 
information about what will happen in these areas and when, and then disclose what the 
impacts will be to coastal villages. 

SRP 6 Exploratory activities occurring during September and October could potentially clash with 
the migratory period of the beluga and bowhead whales perhaps requiring hunters to travel 
further to hunt and potentially reducing the feasibility of the hunt. Even minor disruptions to 
the whale's migration pathway can seriously affect subsistence hunts. 

SRP 7 NMFS must ensure oil and gas activities do not reduce the availability of any affected 
population or species to a level insufficient to meet subsistence needs. 

SRP 8 Subsistence resources could be negatively impacted by exploratory activities. Specific 
comments include: 

• Concerns about the health and welfare of the animals, with results such as that the 
blubber is getting too hard, as a result of seismic activity; 

• Reduction of animals; 
• Noise from seismic operations, exploration drilling, and/or development and production 

activities may make bowhead whales skittish and more difficult to hunt; 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 108 
Comment Analysis Report 

• Aircraft associated with oil and gas operations may negatively affect other subsistence 
resources, including polar bears, walrus, seals, caribou, and coastal and marine birds, 
making it more difficult for Alaska Native hunters to obtain these resources; 

• Water pollution could release toxins that bioaccumulate in top predators, including 
humans; 

• Increased shipping traffic (including the potential for ship strikes) and the associated 
noise are going to impact whaling and other marine mammal subsistence activities. 

SRP 9 The DEIS must also do more to address the potential for harm to coastal communities due to 
the perceived contamination of subsistence resources. The DEIS cites to studies 
demonstrating that perceived contamination is a very real issue for local residents, and 
industrialization at the levels contemplated by the DEIS would undoubtedly contribute to that 
belief. 

SRP 10 Bowhead whales and seals are not the only subsistence resource that Native Alaskan 
communities rely upon. Fishing is also an important resource and different species are hunted 
throughout the year. Subsistence users have expressed concern that activities to support 
offshore exploration will change migratory patterns of fish and krill that occur along the 
coastlines. The DEIS analysis should reflect these concerns. 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 109 
Comment Analysis Report 

Use of Traditional Knowledge (UTK) 
UTK Comments regarding how traditional knowledge (TK) is used in the document or decision 

making process, need to incorporate TK, or processes for documenting TK. 

UTK 1 Applying the TK is not only observing the animals, but also seeing the big picture of the 
Arctic environment. 

UTK 2 It is important that both Western Science and TK be applied in the EIS. There needs to be a 
clear definition of what TK is, and that it protects traditional ways of life but also provides 
valuable information. TK that is used in NEPA documents should be used with consent. 

UTK 3 Specific examples of TK that NMFS should include in the DEIS are as follows: 

• The selection of specific deferral areas should be informed by the TK of our whaling 
captains and should be developed with specific input of each community; 

• The TK of our whaling captains about bowhead whales. Their ability to smell, their 
sensitivity to water pollution, and the potential interference with our subsistence activity 
and/or tainting of our food; and 

• Primary hunting season is usually from April until about August, for all animals. It starts 
in January for seals. Most times it is also year-round, too, with climate change, depending 
on the migration of the animals. Bowhead whale hunts start in April, and beluga hunts are 
whenever they migrate; usually starting in April and continuing until the end of summer. 

UTK 4 To be meaningful, NMFS must obtain and incorporate TK before it commits to management 
decisions that may adversely affect subsistence resources. 

UTK 5 Based on TK, there are not enough data to really determine season closures or times of use 
because subsistence users do not know where so many of these animals go when they are not 
near the coast. 

 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 110 
Comment Analysis Report 

Water and Air Quality (WAQ) 
WAQ Comments regarding water and air quality, including potential to impact or degrade these 

resources. 

WAQ 1 The effects of greenhouse gases are of concern, with regards to sea level rise and ocean 
acidification that occurs with fossil fuel combustion 

WAQ 2 Increases in oil and gas exploration would inevitably bring higher levels of pollution and 
emissions. Discharges, oil spills, increases in air traffic and drill cuttings could all cause both 
water and air damage causing potential effects on human health and the overall environment. 

WAQ 3 The air quality analysis on impacts is flawed and needs more information. Reliance on recent 
draft air permits is not accurate especially for the increases in vessel traffic due to oil and gas 
exploration. All emissions associated with oil and gas development need to be considered not 
just those that are subject to direct regulation or permit conditions. Emissions calculations 
need to include vessels outside the 25 mile radius not just inside. Actual icebreaker emissions 
need to be included also. This will allow more accurate emissions calculations. The use of 
stack testing results and other emissions calculations for Arctic operations are recommended. 

WAQ 4 Many operators have agreed to use ultra-low sulfur fuel or low sulfur fuel in their operations, 
but those that do not agree have to be accounted for. The use of projected air emissions for 
NOx and SOz need to be included to account for those that do not use the lower fuel grades. 

WAQ 5 Since air permits have not yet been applied for by oil companies engaging in seismic or 
geological and geophysical surveys, control factors should not be applied to them without 
knowing the actual information. 

WAQ 6 Concerns about the potential for diversion of bowhead whales and other subsistence species 
due to water and air discharges. The location of these discharges, and waste streams, and 
where they will overlap between the air and water needs to be compared to the whale 
migrations and discern the potential areas of impact. 

WAQ 7 The evaluation of potential air impacts is now outdated. The air quality in Alaska is no longer 
regulated by EPA and the Alaska DEC, and is no longer subject to EPA's OCS regulations 
and air permitting requirements. The new regulatory authority is the Department of the 
Interior. This shows that at least some sources will not be subject to EPA regulations or air 
permitting 

WAQ 8 Other pollutants are a cause of concern besides just CO and PM. What about Nox, and PM2.5 
emissions? All of these are of concern in the Alaska OCS. 

WAQ 9 The use of exclusion zones around oil and gas activities will not prevent pollutant levels 
above regulatory standards. Air pollution is expected to be the highest within the exclusion 
zones and likely to exceed applicable standards. A full and transparent accounting of these 
impacts needs to be assessed. 

WAQ 10 The DEIS needs to analyze the full size of the emissions potential of the equipment that the 
oil companies are intending to operate in the EIS project area. 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS 111 
Comment Analysis Report 

WAQ 11 Identify the total number of oil and gas projects that may be expected to operate during a 
single season in each sea, the potential proximity of such operations, and the impacts of 
multiple and/or clustered operations upon local and regional air quality. 

WAQ 12 Native Alaskans expressed concerned about the long term effects of dispersants, air pollution, 
and water pollution. All emissions must be considered including drilling ships, vessels, 
aircraft, and secondary pollution like ozone and secondary particulate matters. Impacts of 
water quality and discharges tainting subsistence foods are considered likely to occur. 

 

 



 
 

APPENDIX A 
Submission and Comment Index 

 

 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS A-1 
Comment Analysis Report 

Commenter Submission ID Comments 

Abramaitis, Loretta  2827 CEF 9, OSR 3  

AEWC 
Aiken, Johnny  

3778 ALT 20, ALT 21, ALT 31, ALT 34, CEF 2, CEF 5, CEF 7, CEF 8, CEF 
11, COR 11, COR 15, DATA 2, DATA 5, EDI 3, MIT 20, MIT 31, MIT 
47, MIT 84, MIT 85, MIT 86, MIT 87, MIT 88, MIT 89, MIT 90, MMI 
11, MMI 27, NEP 1, NEP 11, NEP 14, NEP 26, NEP 50, REG 11, REG 
12, REG 13, REG 14, REG 3, RME 6, UTK 3 

Anchorage, Public 
Meeting 

13142 ALT 1, ALT 3, ALT 4, ALT 6, ALT 7, ALT 8, ALT 13, ALT 35, CEF 2, 
CEF 5, CEF 6, CEF 7, CEF 8, CEF 9, CEF 10, COR 6, COR 8, GSE 1, 
GSE 4, MIT 2, MIT 3, MIT 9, MIT 20, MIT 22, MIT 23, MIT 27, MIT 63, 
MIT 106, MMI 6, NED 1, NEP 1, NEP 4,  NEP 5, NEP 7, NEP 10, NEP 
11, NEP 13, NEP 14, NEP 15, NEP 16, NEP 17, NEP 49, OSR 1, OSR 3, 
REG 16, REG 4, RME 1, RME 20, RME 29, RME 31, RME 35, SEI 1, 
SRP 3, SRP 6, SRP 8, UTK 4, WAQ 12  

Barrow, Public Meeting 13144 ACK 1, CEF 4, CEF 7, CEF 8, CEF 10, COR 1, COR 3, GPE 4, GSE 2, 
ICL 1, ICL 3, MIT 20, MIT 31, MIT 47, MIT 82, MIT 108, MIT 114, NEP 
14, NEP 26, NEP 47, OSR 1, OSR 3, OSR 6, OSR 13, PER 3, RME 2, 
RME 31, RME 36, SRP 3, UTK 1, UTK 2, UTK 3, UTK 4, WAQ 12  

Bednar, Marek  3002 ACK 1  

Black, Lester (Skeet) 2095 MIT 5, NED 1, SEI 3  

Boone, James  2394 CEF 9, MIT 1, NEP 14, OSR 1  

Bouwmeester, Hanneke  82 MMI 1, REG 1  

North Slope Borough 
Brower, Charlotte  

3779 ALT 17, ALT 21, ALT 22, CEF 5, CEF 9, DATA 3, DATA 17, DATA 21, 
DATA 22, EDI 1, EDI 4, EDI 5, EDI 9, EDI 11, EDI 12, EDI 14, GSE 3, 
MIT 20, MIT 82, MIT 91, MIT 92, MIT 93, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 4, MMI 
22, MMI 25, NEP 29, NEP 35, OSR 1, OSR 7, OSR 9, OSR 10, OSR 11, 
OSR 16, OSR 18, OSR 19, RME 1, RME 12, RME 13, RME 17, RME 18, 
RME 19, RME 20, RME 21, RME 22, RME 33, RME 35  

Conocophillips 
Brown, David  

3775 ALT 4, ALT 6, ALT 8, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 30, COR 8, MIT 2, MIT 3, 
MIT 9, MIT 22, MIT 23, MIT 24, MIT 63, MIT 81, MMI 1, MMI 8, NEP 
1, NEP 4, NEP 5, NEP 7, NEP 11, NEP 12, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 17, 
NEP 21, REG 4  

Burnell Gutsell, Anneke-
Reeve  

1964 CEF 9, MIT 1, NEP 14, OSR 3, RME 1  

Cagle, Andy  81 OSR 3, REG 5, WAQ 1  

Alaska Inter-Tribal 
Council 
Calcote, Delice  

2093 ALT 1, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 7, COR 1, EDI 3, ICL 2, MIT 1, NEP 2, NEP 
13, OSR 4, REG 5, RME 2, RME 31, SEI 4  

Cathy Giessel, Sen.  2090 NEP 7, REG 4  

Childs, Jefferson  3781 ALT 9, COR 12, DATA 3, EDI 15, GPE 3, HAB 2, MIT 82, MMI 6, MMI 
30, MMI 31, NEP 13, NEP 16, NEP 46, RME 8, RME 24, RME 28, RME 
35 

Christiansen, Shane B.  80 ACK 1  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS A-2 
Comment Analysis Report 

Commenter Submission ID Comments 

Cornell University 
Clark, Christopher  

3772 CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, DATA 2, MIT 72, MIT 73, MIT 74, MMI 19, 
NEP 27, RME 2, RME 16 

Clarke, Chris  76 NED 1, REG 5  

Cummings, Terry  87 MMI 35, OSR 1, OSR 15, REG 5, SRP 3  

Danger, Nick  77 NED 1  

Davis, William  2884 CEF 9, MIT 1, NEP 14, OSR 3, RME 1  

International Fund for 
Animal Welfare 
Flocken, Jeffrey  

3762 ALT 1, ALT 33, CEF 4, CEF 9, COR 7, MIT 20, MIT 42, MIT 43, MIT 
44, MIT 45, MIT 8, OSR 1, OSR 7, RME 34, RME 39, RME 6, RME 9  

Foster, Dolly  89 COR 18  

ION Geophysical 
Corporation 
Gagliardi, Joe  

3761 ALT 6, ALT 12, ALT 16, CEF 6, COR 8, EDI 1, EDI 2, EDI 3, EDI 8, 
EDI 9, EDI 13, MIT 9, MMI 8, MIT 22, MIT 23, MIT 29, MIT 30, MIT 
33, MIT 34, MIT 35, MIT 36, MIT 37, MIT 38, MIT 39, MIT 40, MIT 41, 
MIT 60, NEP 8, NEP 9, NEP 11, REG 4, SEI 1  

Giessel, Sen., Cathy  2090 NEP 7, REG 4  

Arctic Slope Regional 
Corporation 
Glenn, Richard  

3760 CEF 5, EDI 10, EDI 12, MIT 31, MIT 32, MIT 61, NED 1, NEP 7, NEP 
11, NEP 12, OSR 3, OSR 14, SEI 2, SEI 3  

Harbour, Dave  3773 REG 4, SEI 2  

Ocean Conservancy 
Hartsig, Andrew  

3752 ALT 4, ALT 21, CEF 1, CEF 2, CEF 8, CEF 9, CEF 11, DATA 2, DATA 
9, DATA 10, EDI 3, EDI 4, EDI 7, EDI 10, MIT 19, MIT 20, MIT 21, 
MIT 47, MMI 2, MMI 12, MMI 13, NEP 14, NEP 15, OSR 1, REG 5, 
RME 1, RME 2, RME 9, RME 31, RME 37, SRP 4, SRP 7, SRP 8, UTK 
2, UTK 4  

The Pew Environmental 
Group 
Heiman, Marilyn  

3752 ALT 4, ALT 21, CEF 1, CEF 2, CEF 8, CEF 9, CEF 11, DATA 2, DATA 
9, DATA 10, EDI 3, EDI 4, EDI 7, EDI 10, MIT 19, MIT 20, MIT 21, 
MIT 47, MMI 2, MMI 12, MMI 13, NEP 14, NEP 15, OSR 1, REG 5, 
RME 1, RME 2, RME 9, RME 31, RME 37, SRP 4, SRP 7, SRP 8, UTK 
2, UTK 4 

Hicks, Katherine  2261 COR 10, NED 1, NEP 11  

Hof, Justin  83 ALT 1  

Greenpeace 
Howells, Dan  

3753 ALT 1, ALT 4, ALT 6, CEF 2, COR 4, DATA 11, EDI 1, GSE 1, GSE 5, 
GSE 7, GSE 8, NEP 14, OSR 3, OSR 5, REG 6, SRP 1, SRP 6  

World Wildlife Fund 
Hughes, Layla  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS A-3 
Comment Analysis Report 

Commenter Submission ID Comments 

NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

Natural Resources 
Defense Council 
Jasny, Michael  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

National Ocean 
Industries Association 
Johnson, Luke  

3766 ALT 2, ALT 3, ALT 4, ALT 6, ALT 8, ALT 13, ALT 14, ALT 23, ALT 
24, ALT 25, ALT 26, CEF 5, CEF 6, DATA 14, DATA 15, DATA 16, 
EDI 1, EDI 2, EDI 3, EDI 4, MIT 2, MIT 9, MIT 22, MIT 23, MIT 29, 
MIT 31, MIT 32, MIT 37, MIT 38, MIT 50, MIT 51, MIT 52, MIT 53, 
MIT 54, MIT 55, MIT 56, MIT 57, MIT 58, MIT 59, MIT 60, MIT 61, 
MMI 1, MMI 8, MMI 14, MMI 15, MMI 16, MMI 17, NED 1, NEP 5, 
NEP 11, NEP 16, NEP 20, NEP 21, NEP 22, NEP 23, NEP 24, NEP 25, 
NEP 26, NEP 27, NEP 28, NEP 29, NEP 30, NEP 51, NEP 52, REG 4, 
REG 7, SEI 1, SEI 2, SEI 5  

Friends of the Earth 
Kaltenstein, John  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

Kivalina Public Meeting 
 

13146 COR 1, NEP 48, NEP 53, OSR 3, OSR 7  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS A-4 
Comment Analysis Report 

Commenter Submission ID Comments 

Kotzebue Public Meeting 
 

13145 CEF 9, EDI 14, ICL 1, MIT 109, MIT 110, MMI 32, MMI 33, REG 17, 
RME 2, SRP 3, UTK 5  

U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce 
Kovacs, William L.  

3766 ALT 2, ALT 3, ALT 4, ALT 6, ALT 8, ALT 13, ALT 14, ALT 23, ALT 
24, ALT 25, ALT 26, CEF 5, CEF 6, DATA 14, DATA 15, DATA 16, 
EDI 1, EDI 2, EDI 3, EDI 4, MIT 2, MIT 9, MIT 22, MIT 23, MIT 29, 
MIT 31, MIT 32, MIT 37, MIT 38, MIT 50, MIT 51, MIT 52, MIT 53, 
MIT 54, MIT 55, MIT 56, MIT 57, MIT 58, MIT 59, MIT 60, MIT 61, 
MMI 1, MMI 8, MMI 14, MMI 15, MMI 16, MMI 17, NED 1, NEP 5, 
NEP 11, NEP 16, NEP 20, NEP 21, NEP 22, NEP 23, NEP 24, NEP 25, 
NEP 26, NEP 27, NEP 28, NEP 29, NEP 30, NEP 51, NEP 52, REG 4, 
REG 7, SEI 1, SEI 2, SEI 5 

Krause, Danielle  3625 CEF 9, MIT 1, NEP 14, OSR 3, RME 1  

Lambertsen, Richard  2096 MIT 6  

Pacific Environment 
Larson, Shawna  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

Lish, Chris  3763 ALT 1, CEF 9, MIT 1, NEP 14, NEP 16, OSR 3, RME 1  

Locascio, Julie  86 ACK 1  

Lopez, Irene  88 ALT 1  

Shell Alaska Venture 
Macrander, Michael  

3768 ALT 2,  ALT 3, ALT 4, ALT 6, ALT 8, ALT 10, ALT 13, ALT 16, ALT 
17, ALT 29, ALT 36, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 11, COR 5, COR 6, COR 8, 
COR 10, COR 13, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 17, DATA 18, DATA 19, 
DCH 2, EDI 1, EDI 2, EDI 3, EDI 4, EDI 5, EDI 7, EDI 8, EDI 9, EDI 10, 
EDI 11, EDI 12, EDI 13, EDI 16, GPE 1, GPE 5, GSE 1, GSE 6, MIT 2, 
MIT 20, MIT 22, MIT 23, MIT 26, MIT 27, MIT 28, MIT 29, MIT 30, 
MIT 33, MIT 37, MIT 38, MIT 39, MIT 40, MIT 41, MIT 57, MIT 59, 
MIT 60, MIT 62, MIT 63, MIT 64, MIT 65, MIT 66, MIT 67, MIT 68, 
MIT 69, MIT 70, MIT 71, MIT 9, MIT 115, MMI 8, MMI 34, MMI 35, 
NEP 8, NEP 9, NEP 10, NEP 11, NEP 12, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, NEP 
29, NEP 30, NEP 31, NEP 32, NEP 33, NEP 54, NEP 55, NEP 56, OSR 
14, REG 4, REG 8, REG 9, RME 14, RME 15, RME 33, SEI 1, SEI 2, SEI 
5  

Loggerhead Instruments 
Mann, David  

3772 CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, DATA 2, MIT 72, MIT 73, MIT 74, MMI 19, 
NEP 27, RME 2, RME 16 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS A-5 
Comment Analysis Report 

Commenter Submission ID Comments 

Earthjustice 
Mayer, Michael  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

Oceana 
Mecum, Brianne  

3774 ALT 1, CEF 5, COR 9, DATA 20, EDI 5, EDI 14, MIT 31, MIT 47, MIT 
75, MIT 76, MIT 77, MIT 78, MIT 79, MIT 80, MIT 85, MMI 9, MMI 20, 
OSR 1, REG 5, RME 4, RME 23, RME 32, RME 35, WAQ 2  

Northern Alaska 
Environmental Center 
Miller, Pamela A.  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

University of St. 
Andrews 
Miller, Patrick  

3772 CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, DATA 2, MIT 72, MIT 73, MIT 74, MMI 19, 
NEP 27, RME 2, RME 16 

Miller, Peter  2151 CEF 9, MIT 1, NEP 14, OSR 3, RME 1  

U.S. Oil & Gas 
Association 
Modiano, Alby  

3766 ALT 2, ALT 3, ALT 4, ALT 6, ALT 8, ALT 13, ALT 14, ALT 23, ALT 
24, ALT 25, ALT 26, CEF 5, CEF 6, DATA 14, DATA 15, DATA 16, 
EDI 1, EDI 2, EDI 3, EDI 4, MIT 2, MIT 9, MIT 22, MIT 23, MIT 29, 
MIT 31, MIT 32, MIT 37, MIT 38, MIT 50, MIT 51, MIT 52, MIT 53, 
MIT 54, MIT 55, MIT 56, MIT 57, MIT 58, MIT 59, MIT 60, MIT 61, 
MMI 1, MMI 8, MMI 14, MMI 15, MMI 16, MMI 17, NED 1, NEP 5, 
NEP 11, NEP 16, NEP 20, NEP 21, NEP 22, NEP 23, NEP 24, NEP 25, 
NEP 26, NEP 27, NEP 28, NEP 29, NEP 30, NEP 51, NEP 52, REG 4, 
REG 7, SEI 1, SEI 2, SEI 5 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS A-6 
Comment Analysis Report 

Commenter Submission ID Comments 

Statoil USA E&P Inc. 
Moore, Bill  

3758 ALT 8, ALT 13, DATA 38, EDI 3, EDI 4, EDI 5, EDI 8, EDI 9, MIT 2, 
MIT 30, MMI 2, NEP 4, NEP 7, NEP 11, NEP 12, NEP 14 

Alaska Oil and Gas 
Association 
Moriarty, Kara  

3754 ALT 3, ALT 8, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 30, EDI 7, MIT 9, MIT 22, MIT 
23, MIT 24, MMI 1, MMI 8, NEP 1, NEP 4, NEP 5, NEP 7, NEP 11, NEP 
12, NEP 14, NEP 17, REG 4  

Mottishaw, Petra  3782 CEF 7, NED 1, NEP 14, RME 1  

Oceana 
Murray, Susan  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

Audubon Alaska 
Myers, Eric F.  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

National Resources 
Defense Council (form 
letter containing 36,445 
signatures) 

3784 MMI 1, OSR 3, REG 5  

Center for Biological 
Diversity 
Noblin, Rebecca  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS A-7 
Comment Analysis Report 

Commenter Submission ID Comments 

MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

Duke University 
Nowacek, Douglas P.  

3772 CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, DATA 2, MIT 72, MIT 73, MIT 74, MMI 19, 
NEP 27, RME 2, RME 16  

International Association 
of Drilling Contractors 
Petty, Brian  

3766 ALT 2, ALT 3, ALT 4, ALT 6, ALT 8, ALT 13, ALT 14, ALT 23, ALT 
24, ALT 25, ALT 26, CEF 5, CEF 6, DATA 14, DATA 15, DATA 16, 
EDI 1, EDI 2, EDI 3, EDI 4, MIT 2, MIT 9, MIT 22, MIT 23, MIT 29, 
MIT 31, MIT 32, MIT 37, MIT 38, MIT 50, MIT 51, MIT 52, MIT 53, 
MIT 54, MIT 55, MIT 56, MIT 57, MIT 58, MIT 59, MIT 60, MIT 61, 
MMI 1, MMI 8, MMI 14, MMI 15, MMI 16, MMI 17, NED 1, NEP 5, 
NEP 11, NEP 16, NEP 20, NEP 21, NEP 22, NEP 23, NEP 24, NEP 25, 
NEP 26, NEP 27, NEP 28, NEP 29, NEP 30, NEP 51, NEP 52, REG 4, 
REG 7, SEI 1, SEI 2, SEI 5 

World Wildlife Fund 
Pintabutr, America May  

3765 ALT 1  

Point Hope Public 
Meeting 
 

13147 COR 19, COR 8, GSE 5, ICL 1, MIT 84, NEP 49, OSR 1, RME 1, SRP 
10, SRP 3, SRP 8  

Resource Development 
Council 
Portman, Carl  

2303 ALT 3, ALT 6, MIT 2, MIT 9, MIT 27, NED 1, NEP 1, NEP 10, NEP 11, 
NEP 12, REG 4, SEI 3  

American Petroleum 
Institute 
Radford, Andy  

3766 ALT 2, ALT 3, ALT 4, ALT 6, ALT 8, ALT 13, ALT 14, ALT 23, ALT 
24, ALT 25, ALT 26, CEF 5, CEF 6, DATA 14, DATA 15, DATA 16, 
EDI 1, EDI 2, EDI 3, EDI 4, MIT 2, MIT 9, MIT 22, MIT 23, MIT 29, 
MIT 31, MIT 32, MIT 37, MIT 38, MIT 50, MIT 51, MIT 52, MIT 53, 
MIT 54, MIT 55, MIT 56, MIT 57, MIT 58, MIT 59, MIT 60, MIT 61, 
MMI 1, MMI 8, MMI 14, MMI 15, MMI 16, MMI 17, NED 1, NEP 5, 
NEP 11, NEP 16, NEP 20, NEP 21, NEP 22, NEP 23, NEP 24, NEP 25, 
NEP 26, NEP 27, NEP 28, NEP 29, NEP 30, NEP 51, NEP 52, REG 4, 
REG 7, SEI 1, SEI 2, SEI 5 

Marine Mammal 
Commission 
Ragen, Timothy J.  

3767 ALT 4, ALT 7, ALT 17, ALT 19, ALT 26, ALT 28, CEF 11, COR 6, COR 
8, EDI 3, EDI 8, EDI 9, MIT 20, MIT 61, MIT 62, MMI 18, NEP 14, NEP 
26, REG 2, RME 6, RME 10, RME 12, RME 13, RME 37  

Randelia, Cyrus  78 ACK 1, CEF 5, OSR 1, OSR 2  

The Nature Conservancy 
Reed, Amanda  

3764 CEF 10, COR 17, COR 9, DATA 13, EDI 5,  EDI 11, EDI 12, GPE 1, 
MIT 46, MIT 47, MIT 48, MIT 49, NEP 15, OSR 1, OSR 15, OSR 7, OSR 
8, RME 1, RME 2, RME 9, RME 31   

US EPA, Region 10 
Reichgott, Christine  

3783 DATA 34  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS A-8 
Comment Analysis Report 

Commenter Submission ID Comments 

Reiner, Erica  2098 NEP 16, PER 1, REG 6  

Sierra Club 
Ritzman, Dan  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

Cultural REcyclists 
Robinson, Tina  

3759 ALT 1, CEF 2, CEF 11, GPE 1, NEP 13, OSR 6  

Rossin, Linda  3548 CEF 9, MIT 1, NEP 14, OSR 3, RME 1  

Schalavin, Laurel  79 NED 1  

Alaska Wilderness 
League 
Shogan, Cindy  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

Sierra Club (form letter 
containing 12,991 
signatures) 

90 CEF 9, MIT 1, NEP 14, OSR 3, REG 5, RME 1  

Simon, Lorali  2094 MIT 2, MIT 3, MIT 4, REG 4  

Center for Regulatory 
Effectiveness 
Slaughter, Scott  

2306 DATA 6, DATA 7, DATA 8, DATA 13, EDI 2, EDI 3, MIT 2, MIT 10, 
MIT 11, MIT 27, MMI 8  

SEA Inc. 
Southall, Brandon  

3772 CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, DATA 2, MIT 72, MIT 73, MIT 74, MMI 19, 
NEP 27, RME 2, RME 16 



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS A-9 
Comment Analysis Report 

Commenter Submission ID Comments 

Ocean Conservation 
Research 
Stocker, Michael  

2099 CEF 9, DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, MIT 7, MIT 8, 
MMI 4, MMI 5, MMI 6, MMI 7, NEP 2, NEP 3, OSR 2, OSR 20, PER 2, 
RME 3, RME 37, RME 4, RME 5  

Ocean Conservation 
Research 
Stocker, Michael  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

Stoutamyer, Carla  2465 CEF 9, MIT 1, NEP 14  

AK Dept Natural 
Resources 
Sullivan, Daniel  

3756 ALT 3, ALT 8, ALT 11, ALT 13, COR 5, COR 6, COR 12, DATA 39, 
DATA 40, DCH 1, EDI 1, EDI 2, EDI 3, EDI 4, EDI 7, EDI 8, EDI 9, EDI 
10, EDI 11, EDI 12, EDI 13,  GPE 2, GSE 1, GSE 6, GSE 7, MIT 2, MIT 
22, MIT 26, MIT 27, MIT 28, MIT 29, MIT 31, NED 1, NEP 6, NEP 7, 
NEP 12, NEP 18, NEP 19, REG 4, RME 7, SEI 1, SEI 3, SEI 5  

Thorson, Scott  2097 ALT 3, NED 1, NEP 11  

International Association 
of Geophysical 
Contractors 
Tsoflias, Sarah  

3766 ALT 2, ALT 3, ALT 4, ALT 6, ALT 8, ALT 13, ALT 14, ALT 23, ALT 
24, ALT 25, ALT 26, CEF 5, CEF 6, DATA 14, DATA 15, DATA 16, 
EDI 1, EDI 2, EDI 3, EDI 4, MIT 2, MIT 9, MIT 22, MIT 23, MIT 29, 
MIT 31, MIT 32, MIT 37, MIT 38, MIT 50, MIT 51, MIT 52, MIT 53, 
MIT 54, MIT 55, MIT 56, MIT 57, MIT 58, MIT 59, MIT 60, MIT 61, 
MMI 1, MMI 8, MMI 14, MMI 15, MMI 16, MMI 17, NED 1, NEP 5, 
NEP 11, NEP 16, NEP 20, NEP 21, NEP 22, NEP 23, NEP 24, NEP 25, 
NEP 26, NEP 27, NEP 28, NEP 29, NEP 30, NEP 51, NEP 52, REG 4, 
REG 7, SEI 1, SEI 2, SEI 5 

World Society for the 
Protection of Animals 
Vale, Karen  

3749 ALT 1, MMI 3, MMI 9, MMI 10, MMI 11, NEP 14, OSR 1, OSR 3  

Vishanoff, Jonathan  84 OSR 1, OSR 13  

Wainwright Public 
Meeting 
 

13143 ACK 1, GSE 4, MIT 107, NED 1, NEP 48  

Walker, Willie  2049 CEF 9, MIT 1, NEP 14, OSR 3, RME 1  



FINAL 
APRIL 10, 2012 

 

Effects of Oil and Gas Activities in the Arctic Ocean EIS A-10 
Comment Analysis Report 

Commenter Submission ID Comments 

Defenders of Wildlife 
Weaver, Sierra  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

The Wilderness Society 
Whittington-Evans, 
Nicole  

3780 ALT 1, ALT 5, ALT 6, ALT 11, ALT 13, ALT 15, ALT 17, ALT 18, ALT 
19, ALT 21, ALT 32, CEF 4, CEF 5, CEF 9, CEF 10, CEF 11, COR 14, 
DATA 1, DATA 2, DATA 3, DATA 4, DATA 5, DATA 12, DATA 13, 
DATA 22, DATA 23, DATA 24, DATA 25, DATA 26, DATA 27, DATA 
28, DATA 29, DATA 30, DATA 31, DATA 32, DATA 33, DATA 37, 
EDI 11, GPE 1, GPE 2, GSE 3, GSE 8, HAB 2, MIT 20, MIT 45, MIT 47, 
MIT 82, MIT 94, MIT 95, MIT 96, MIT 97, MIT 98, MIT 99, MIT 100, 
MIT 101, MIT 102, MIT 103, MIT 104, MIT 105, MMI 1, MMI 2, MMI 
6, MMI 7, MMI 8, MMI 9, MMI 21, MMI 22, MMI 23, MMI 24, MMI 25, 
MMI 26, MMI 27, MMI 28, MMI 29, NEP 14, NEP 16, NEP 21, NEP 26, 
NEP 27, NEP 36, NEP 37, NEP 38, NEP 39, NEP 40, NEP 41, NEP 42, 
NEP 43, NEP 44, NEP 45, OSR 1, OSR 11, OSR 12, OSR 14, REG 15, 
REG 18, RME 1, RME 7, RME 8, RME 11, RME 16, RME 20, RME 23, 
RME 24, RME 25, RME 26, RME 27, RME 28, RME 29, RME 30, RME 
39, SRP 1, SRP 2, SRP 9, WAQ 2, WAQ 3, WAQ 7, WAQ 8, WAQ 9, 
WAQ 10, WAQ 11   

AEWC 
Winter, Chris  

3778 ALT 20, ALT 21, ALT 31, ALT 34, CEF 2, CEF 5, CEF 7, CEF 8, CEF 
11, COR 11, COR 15, DATA 2, DATA 5, EDI 3, MIT 20, MIT 31, MIT 
47, MIT 84, MIT 85, MIT 86, MIT 87, MIT 88, MIT 89, MIT 90, MMI 
11, MMI 27, NEP 1, NEP 11, NEP 14, NEP 26, NEP 50, REG 11, REG 
12, REG 13, REG 14, REG 3, RME 6, UTK 3  

Wittmaack, Christiana  85 ALT 1, MMI 2, OSR 1, OSR 13, OSR 17  

 



EFFECTS OF OIL AND GAS ACTIVITIES IN THE ARCTIC OCEAN DRAFT EIS 
COMMENT AND RESPONSE MATRIX 

(April 2012) 
 
Matrix Completed By: [Enter Agency Name and Office] 
 

Issue 
Category 

Code 
SOC # Response 

Change 
to EIS? 
(Y or N) 

Section # Needing Change and Text of Suggested 
Change 

     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     



Issue 
Category 

Code 
SOC # Response 

Change 
to EIS? 
(Y or N) 

Section # Needing Change and Text of Suggested 
Change 

     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     



Issue 
Category 

Code 
SOC # Response 

Change 
to EIS? 
(Y or N) 

Section # Needing Change and Text of Suggested 
Change 

     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     



Issue 
Category 

Code 
SOC # Response 

Change 
to EIS? 
(Y or N) 

Section # Needing Change and Text of Suggested 
Change 

     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
 


	_ FW_ Final Comment Analysis Re
	FINAL Comment Analysis Report_Arctic EIS (041012)
	Cover Page 
	TABLE OF CONTENTS
	LIST OF TABLES
	LIST OF FIGURES
	LIST OF APPENDICES
	ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
	1.0 INTRODUCTION
	2.0 BACKGROUND
	3.0 THE ROLE OF PUBLIC COMMENT
	Table 1.  Public Meetings, Locations and Dates

	4.0  ANALYSIS OF PUBLIC SUBMISSIONS
	Table 2.  Issue Categories for DEIS Comments
	Figure 1:  Comments by Issue

	5.0 STATEMENTS OF CONCERN
	Comment Acknowledged (ACK)
	Alternatives (ALT)
	Cumulative Effects (CEF)
	Coordination and Compatibility (COR)
	Data (DAT)
	Discharge (DCH)
	Editorial (EDI)
	Physical Environment – General (GPE)
	Social Environment – General (GSE)
	Habitat (HAB)
	Iñupiat Culture and Way of Life (ICL)
	Mitigation Measures (MIT)
	Marine Mammal and other Wildlife Impacts (MMI)
	National Energy Demand and Supply (NED)
	NEPA (NEP)
	Oil Spill Risks (OSR)
	Peer Review (PER)
	Regulatory Compliance (REG)
	Research, Monitoring, Evaluation Needs (RME)
	Socioeconomic Impacts (SEI)
	Subsistence Resource Protection (SRP)
	Use of Traditional Knowledge (UTK)
	Water and Air Quality (WAQ)

	APPENDIX A

	DEIS Comment Response Matrix (template)

