
Rashah McChesney 
Peninsula Clarion 
150 Trading Bay 
Kenai, Alaska 99611 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
NATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE 
1 31 5 East-West Highway 
Silver Spring, Maryland 2081 0 

THE DIRECTOR 

JUN l 6 2014 

Re: FOIA Request # DOC-NOAA-2014-000941 

Dear Ms. McChesney: 

This letter is in response to your Freedom oflnformation Act (FOIA) request# DOC-NOAA- 2014-
000941 dated May 19, 2014, and received by our office on May 23, 2014. You specifically requested : " 

... access to and a copy of comments submitted to NOAA Fisheries in regards to fishery disaster funds 
for the 2012 fishing season. I would like both the Cook Inlet region and Yukon-Kuskokwim region 
comments to be given in their original, un-redacted form. 
I agree to pay any reasonable copying and postage fees of not more than $10. Ifthe cost would be 
greater than this amount, please notify me. Please provide a receipt indicating the charges for each 
document. 

As provided by state regulation, I will expect your response within ten (10) business days. lfyou 
choose to deny this request, please provide a written explanation for the denial including a reference to 
the specific statutory exemption(s) upon which you rely. Also, please provide all segregable portions 
of otherwise exempt material. " 

This letter completes our response to your request. This search was conducted within the Alaska National 
Marine Fisheries Service, Operations and Management Division, and located 57 documents responsive to 
your request. Enclosed is an index of the released and exempt records. A summary follows: 

56 documents are enclosed and released in full 

1 document is enclosed and released in part pursuant to: 

5 U.S.C. ยง 552 (b)(6) which protects personnel and medical files and similar files about individuals when 
the disclosure of such information would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy. 
The redacted portion of the document contains personal phone and address information of the employees, 
which they did not directly provide to the agency. 

@ Printed on Recycled Paper 
THE ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR 

FOR FISHERIES 



Under 15 C.F.R. ยง 4.IO(a) (2012), you have the right to appeal this denial determination. The Assistant 
General Counsel for Administration must receive your appeal within 30 calendar days of the date of the 
initial denial letter. Address and send your appeal to the following office: 

Assistant General Counsel for Administration (Office) 
U.S. Department of Commerce 

Room 5898-C 
14th and Constitution Avenue, NW 

Washington, DC 20230 

You may also send your appeal by e-mail to FOIAAppeals@doc.gov or by facsimile (fax) to (202) 482-
2552. The appeal must include a copy of the original request, the response to the request, and a statement 
of the reasons why withheld records should be made available and why denial of the records was in error. 
The submission (including e-mail and fax submissions) is not complete without the required enclosures. 
The appeal , the envelope, the e-mail subject line, and the fax cover sheet should be clearly marked 
"Freedom oflnformation Act Appeal." The e-mail, fax machine, and Office of the General Counsel are 
monitored only on working days during normal business hours (8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Eastern Time, 
Monday through Friday). FOIA appeals posted to the e-mail box, or sent to the fax machine, or received 
by the Office of General Counsel after normal business hours will be deemed received on the next normal 
business day. 

If you have any questions regarding this request, please contact Ms. Ellen Sebastian, FOIA Coordinator 
Alaska Region at (907) 586-7152 or ellen.sebastian@noaa.gov. 

Enclosures 

2 

Sincerely, 

Ileen Sobeck, 
Assistant Administrator 

for Fisheries 


